---
layout: casebook
permalink: /chap2/
chapter: Chapter 2
title: Establishing an Employment Relationship
---

# 1. Identifying Employees

## 1.1 The Legal Significance of Employee Status

### Lemmerman v. A.T. Williams Oil Co.

#### 350 S.E.2d 83 (N.C. 1986)

##### FRYE, Justice.

The sole issue on this appeal is whether the Court of Appeals correctly affirmed the trial court's conclusion that plaintiff Shane Tucker was an employee of the defendant, A.T. Williams Oil Company. For the reasons set forth in this opinion, we conclude that the Court of Appeals was correct in so affirming.

On 1 December 1982, plaintiff Shane Tucker, then aged eight, slipped on a sidewalk on defendant's property and fell, cutting his hand. He and his mother, plaintiff Sylvia Tucker, filed this action against defendant on 26 June 1984. In their complaint, plaintiffs alleged in essence that Shane Tucker's injuries were proximately caused by defendant's negligence. They sought damages for medical expenses, lost wages, and pain and suffering. R. Douglas Lemmerman was appointed _guardian ad litem_ for the minor plaintiff Shane.

Defendant filed an answer and raised as one of its defenses lack of subject matter jurisdiction. It asserted that the child Shane was its employee as defined by the Workers' Compensation Act and that the Industrial Commission accordingly had exclusive jurisdiction over plaintiffs' claim. Following preliminary discovery, defendant moved to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. Upon the parties' stipulation that the trial judge find jurisdictional facts, Judge DeRamus made findings and concluded that Shane was an employee injured within the course and scope of his employment with defendant as defined in the Workers' Compensation Act. The judge therefore dismissed plaintiffs' action for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. Plaintiffs appealed to the Court of Appeals, which affirmed with a dissent by Webb, J., on the question of whether the evidence supported the conclusion that plaintiff Shane was an employee of defendant.

"By statute the Superior Court is divested of original jurisdiction of all actions which come within the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Act." The Act provides that its remedies shall be an employee's only remedies against his or her employer for claims covered by the Act. Remedies available at common law are specifically excluded. Therefore, the question of whether plaintiff Shane Tucker was defendant's employee as defined by the Act is clearly jurisdictional. This issue is not affected by the fact that the minor may have been illegally employed because the Act specifically includes within its provisions illegally employed minors.[^Lemmerman1]

[ *** ]

The trial judge made the following findings of facts pertinent to this issue:

> 3. Prior to the incident referred to in the complaint, Ken Schneiderman was employed as the manager of the defendant's place of business on Wendover Avenue in Greensboro, North Carolina. As manager, Schneiderman had the authority to hire and fire such employees as he deemed necessary to assist him in the operation of the business, and all wages paid to any of the employees which he hired were deducted from the commission which he received from the defendant.

> 4. Ken Schneiderman employed the minor plaintiff, and paid him varying amounts to perform duties at the defendant's service station—convenience store, including putting up cigarettes, picking up trash, stocking bottles in the cooler, and other odd jobs from time to time while the minor's mother, Sylvia A. Tucker, worked as a cashier for the store.

> EXCEPTION NO. 1

> 5. At the time the minor plaintiff was injured in the accident referred to in the complaint, the minor plaintiff had been performing chores of stocking cigarettes, picking up trash, and other work which was in the course of the trade or business of defendant A.T. Williams Oil Company.

> EXCEPTION NO. 2

> 6. At the time of the incident described in the complaint, the minor plaintiff Jonathan Shane Tucker was a casual employee of defendant A.T. Williams Oil Company, and was performing duties within the course of the trade and business of A.T. Williams Oil Company in the operation of the gas station and convenience store on Wendover Avenue in Greensboro, North Carolina.

> EXCEPTION NO. 3

> 7. Defendant A.T. Williams Oil Company employs more than four persons, and is subject to the provisions of the North Carolina Workers Compensation Act.

Our review of the record shows that there is ample evidence to support each disputed finding.

Plaintiff Shane testified at his deposition that he routinely accompanied his mother to her job as part-time cashier at defendant's store and service station, a Wilco. According to his description, he ordinarily did his homework, ate a snack, and performed odd jobs about the station. These jobs consisted of picking up trash in the store, taking out the garbage, and stocking cigarettes and drinks. He had been doing these jobs for almost a month at the time of the accident. The child said that the jobs generally took him between half an hour and one hour to complete. In return, the store manager, Ken Schneiderman, would pay him a dollar, occasionally more depending on the amount of work he had done. A fair reading of the child's testimony discloses that he clearly expected to be paid for his efforts.

The child also testified that on the day of the accident he had nearly finished his tasks and was on his way to ask Schneiderman if there was anything else Schneiderman wanted him to do when he slipped and fell. He said at one point that he believed that Schneiderman did later give him his dollar, although he was not clear on this point.

The child's mother, Sylvia Tucker, corroborated Shane's account. She testified that at the time of the accident, she was working from 4 p.m. to 7 p.m. as a part-time cashier at Wilco. Schneiderman had Shane "put up stock, straighten the shelves up and pick up trash inside the building" and occasionally outside as well. Mrs. Tucker testified that her understanding was that the child was going to be paid for what he did. Although she told Schneiderman originally that Shane would work without being paid, he rejected this offer and told both her and the child that he would pay Shane for his work. She believed that Schneiderman paid Shane a dollar a day.

Schneiderman signed an affidavit, introduced into evidence, stating that he had hired Shane Tucker for a few dollars to put up cigarettes but with no set hours or wages.

Also before the judge was plaintiffs' verified complaint, which describes plaintiff Shane as defendant's employee and says that he was "casually hired and paid $1.00 a day by the manager of defendant's station, Ken Schneiderman, to put up cigarettes and to do other odd jobs on defendant's premises whenever assistance was needed...."

We believe that this evidence amply supports the trial judge's findings that Schneiderman, who had the authority to hire and fire employees, hired the minor plaintiff to do odd jobs as needed in defendant's service station/convenience store business. Specifically, these tasks included stocking cigarettes and drinks, and picking up trash. At the time of the accident, Shane was engaged in doing these tasks.

We also agree with the trial judge's conclusion that plaintiff Shane was defendant's employee at the time of the accident. Once the underlying facts are established, the nature of the relationship is a question of law and fully reviewable on appeal. This Court has previously defined an employee as follows:

> 'An employee is one who works for another for wages or salary, and the right to demand pay for his services from his employer would seem to be essential to his right to receive compensation under the Workmen's Compensation Act ....'

The statutory definition (N.C.G.S. § 97-2(2))[^Lemmerman2] adds nothing to the common law definition. The trial judge found that Schneiderman had hired the child, that he had authority to hire and fire employees for defendant, and that the jobs Shane did were in the course of defendant's business and that he was engaged in doing them when he fell. We believe these facts, taken together, will support the conclusion that the plaintiff Shane was an employee of defendant at the time of the accident.

[^Lemmerman2]:
  {-} "The term 'employee' means every person engaged in an employment under any appointment or contract of hire or apprenticeship, express or implied, oral or written, including aliens, and also minors, whether lawfully or unlawfully employed, but excluding persons whose employment is both casual and not in the course of the trade, business, profession, or occupation of his employer [...]."

Plaintiffs, however, contend that the evidence does not support the facts and the facts do not support the conclusion.

First, they argue that none of the parties considered Shane to be defendant's employee. They note that Shane at one point said that his employment was "not exactly" a job. Furthermore, in his deposition testimony, Schneiderman explicitly denied hiring Shane, retracting the statement in his affidavit.

We do not find plaintiffs' argument on this point persuasive.

Initially, we note that the parties' own conclusion about their legal relationship is not binding on the court. Moreover, immediately after Shane said that his employment was "not exactly" a job, he described the relationship as helping in the store and getting paid for it. He repeated this description in a later portion of his testimony.

Nor do we believe that Schneiderman's denial of hiring Shane was binding upon the trial judge. Schneiderman essentially gave inconsistent testimony. Initially, in his affidavit, he said that he had hired Shane. Later, in his deposition, he denied hiring him. His deposition testimony contradicted that of Shane and Mrs. Tucker on some points—most notably on the frequency of the child's presence at the Wilco. The trial judge resolved these contradictions and declined to adopt Schneiderman's version. His findings are not vitiated merely by the presence of conflicting evidence. We also note on this issue that Schneiderman repeatedly said that he could not remember details and was evasive on important points. Furthermore, at one point in his deposition, he said, "He [Shane] wasn't an employee. Did you ever hear of child labor? You know, I'm smart enough to know that."[^Lemmerman4]

Moreover, we note that Mrs. Tucker was unsure of her own status. She testified that she did not know whether she herself was a "real employee."

Second, plaintiffs argue that Shane could not have been an employee because Schneiderman did not comply with certain procedural formalities. He did not take an application from Shane or report him on the list of employees he turned into his supervisor for withholding purposes. His normal practice was to pay employees from the cash register;[^Lemmerman5] he paid Shane from his pocket.

We do not believe that any of these factors is dispositive. Our Court of Appeals has held that failure to follow technical procedures such as withholding F.I.C.A. and income taxes is not controlling on the issue of whether an employer-employee relationship exists. We also do not think that Schneiderman's method of paying Shane was as significant under the facts of this case as it might otherwise be, because all wages came out of Schneiderman's commission. He therefore paid all of the employees at Wilco out of his own money.

Third, plaintiffs contend that Shane was not an employee but instead performed gratuitous services. In addition to Schneiderman's testimony denying that he hired Shane, rejected by the trial judge, plaintiffs cite Mrs. Tucker's original statement to Schneiderman that he did not have to pay the child. However, this evidence in fact supports the opposite conclusion, that Shane was an employee. Schneiderman was offered the chance to avail himself of Shane's gratuitous services, but he specifically rejected it and said that he wanted to pay the child for his work. The evidence shows, and the judge found, that he did so.

Finally, plaintiffs contend that if Shane was an employee, he was Schneiderman's personal employee. We disagree. Schneiderman had the authority to hire employees for defendant, and the evidence shows and the trial judge found that the tasks the child performed were in the course of defendant's business, not Schneiderman's personal affairs. We find the facts of this case similar to those of _Michaux v. Bottling Co.,_ 205 N.C. 786 (1934). In _Michaux_, defendant company gave its truck drivers permission to hire and fire helpers as needed to assist them in the distribution of defendant's products. The drivers paid the helpers out of their own wages or commissions. Plaintiff's intestate, a minor, was such a helper who was killed while assisting in a delivery. This Court, noting that the deceased minor's services had been "necessary to the proper and efficient distribution" of defendant's products, essentially found that the deceased was defendant's employee at the time of his death.

For all of the foregoing reasons, the decision of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.

##### MARTIN, Justice, dissenting.

I must respectfully dissent. First, the majority opinion allows the defendant corporation to profit from its own illegal act. Here, defendant corporation claims that it hired plaintiff Shane, an eight-year-old child, as an employee. Defendant's act would be a direct violation of N.C.G.S. § 95-25.5(d), punishable by imposition of civil penalties. This statute establishes the public policy of this state that it is unlawful for employers to employ children thirteen years of age or less.

The public policy of North Carolina also will not permit a wrongdoer to take advantage of or enrich itself as a result of its own wrong. "It is a basic principle of law and equity that no man shall be permitted to take advantage of his own wrong...." Further citation of authority is not necessary for this basic principle of law. The principle is especially applicable where, as here, the power of the parties is so disparate—an eight-year-old child versus a large corporation! The inequity of defendant's plea in bar is thus magnified by the relationship of the parties.

Defendant corporation seeks to defeat the infant plaintiff's cause for personal injuries resulting from the negligence of defendant by using as a shield its own unlawful act of employing the child. This case is not like _McNair v. Ward_, 240 N.C. 330 (1954), where plaintiff's own evidence established that he was an employee of defendant. In _McNair_ the defendant did not present any evidence. To the contrary, here defendant affirmatively attempted to prove that plaintiff child was its employee. Defendant's unlawful employment of the child was one of the direct causes of his injuries, and defendant now seeks to use that unlawful employment to avoid responsibility for those injuries. This will not do, and this Court should not in all good conscience permit defendant to take advantage of its own wrongful act.

Even if this Court allows defendant to rely upon an inequitable defense, the evidence fails, in at least one respect, to support a finding that plaintiff child was defendant's employee. We must not overlook that defendant has the burden of proof to sustain its plea in bar. As the majority states, the right to demand payment from the _employer_, A.T. Williams Oil Company, is an essential element of the employment status. Defendant has failed to carry its burden as to this element.

The evidence in many respects is in conflict. However, defendant has failed to produce a shred of evidence that the eight-year-old child had a right to demand payment for his services from A.T. Williams Oil Company. Also, there is no evidence that plaintiff child could have made such a demand from Schneiderman, albeit defendant argues that plaintiff was its employee and not Schneiderman's. All of the testimony showed that the infrequent payment of amounts ranging from twenty-five cents to a dollar came out of Schneiderman's own money, out of his own pocket. The payments were not made from the cash register, as were payments to defendant's employees. Thus, the record is simply devoid of any evidence that the child could have demanded payment from the corporate defendant for services he rendered to Schneiderman.

On the other hand, the record is replete with evidence that plaintiff child was _not_ an employee of defendant's. Shane was not a listed employee for workers' compensation purposes; his name was not reported to the defendant corporation for tax withholding purposes; Schneiderman testified explicitly that Shane was not an employee.

The majority relies upon _Michaux v. Bottling Co._. The status of plaintiff as an employee was not at issue in _Michaux._ The Industrial Commission made no finding with respect to whether plaintiff was an employee of defendant's, nor did this Court in its opinion. The issue decided in _Michaux_ was whether the accident arose out of and in the course of employment, not whether plaintiff was an employee.

I submit that the more analogous case is _Lucas v. Stores_, 289 N.C. 212 (1976). Lucas had been discharged as an employee of defendant's. His wife also worked for defendant on a double shift from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. After Lucas was discharged, he would go with Mrs. Lucas to work and assist her in managing the convenience store. Defendant's district manager knew that Lucas was at the store and told Mrs. Lucas to let Lucas run the cash register "as long as the ABC law didn't catch him." He also worked on the books and made bank deposits. Mrs. Lucas paid Lucas $2.00 an hour for his work out of her own paycheck. During the course of a robbery of the store, Lucas was shot and killed, and his widow brought a claim for compensation under the Act. The Industrial Commission found that he was an employee at the time in question. The Court of Appeals reversed the Commission, and this Court affirmed. The Court stated that the acts of Lucas in going with his wife to the store and helping out in the work were entirely consistent with the desire of an unemployed husband to be with his wife at her work and to assist her in the performance of her duties, especially where the work location was likely to attract armed robbers at night. This Court found no contract of employment existed.

Likewise, here defendant desired to employ Sylvia Tucker, plaintiff child's mother, to work in the convenience store. She could not do so unless defendant agreed to let her eight-year-old son come to the store after school and remain until she completed her work. Defendant agreed to this plan. While on the premises the child from time to time performed menial tasks for Schneiderman, who sometimes would give the boy payments ranging from twenty-five cents to a dollar for his work. This is entirely consistent with the problem of a working mother who needs employment but must also supervise her young child. Shane was on the premises not as an employee of the corporate defendant, but because it was necessary in order for his mother to work. Such are the demands of our modern society. As in _Lucas,_ plaintiff child was not an employee of defendant's.

Assuming arguendo that defendant may rely upon its plea in bar and that there is sufficient evidence to support a finding that Shane was an employee of defendant's, the trial court erred in sustaining defendant's plea in bar. If it is true, as defendant insists, that there was a contract of employment between Shane and the defendant, it was a contract with an infant and voidable at the option of the infant, Shane. Upon disaffirmance of a contract by an infant, the contract is void ab initio. The status of the parties is as if there had never been a contract between them.

By bringing this common law action against defendant, the infant plaintiff has disavowed the former contract between the parties and relinquished any rights he may have had under the Workers' Compensation Act by virtue of the contract. By disavowing the contract, he has elected to pursue his common law remedy. That Shane avoided the contract by instituting the action is of no moment; it is just as effective as writing a letter of disaffirmance to defendant prior to commencing the action. The lawsuit and the evidence and contentions by plaintiff Shane clearly notified defendant that the contract was avoided. Upon plaintiff infant's disaffirmance of the contract, it was void ab initio and defendant could not rely upon a nonexisting contract to defeat plaintiff infant's action.

For the above reasons I vote to allow the infant plaintiff to pursue his common law action against defendant.

[^Lemmerman1]: (n.1 in opinion) The argument has been made that since the minor plaintiff may have been illegally employed, defendant should not be allowed to prevail upon this defense. However, "[a] universal principle as old as the law is that the proceedings of a court without jurisdiction of the subject matter are a nullity "If a court finds at any stage of the proceedings it is without jurisdiction, it is its duty to take notice of the defect and ... dismiss the suit." Therefore, if the Industrial Commission has jurisdiction over the claim of an illegally employed minor and the superior court does not, the superior court would have the duty to raise this issue _ex mero motu_ [on it own initiative, without requiring a motion]. 

[^Lemmerman4]: (n.4 in opinion) Schneiderman testified that he hired his own children to work at the Wilco and that defendant promoted this arrangement because "you could work your kids for less money." 

[^Lemmerman5]: (n.5 in opinion) He paid their net pay out of the register and submitted their names and pay records to his supervisor for payment of payroll taxes.

## 1.2 Distinguishing Employees from Independent Contractors 

### Razak v. Uber Technologies, Inc. 

#### 951 F.3d 137 (3d Cir. 2020)

##### GREENAWAY, JR., Circuit Judge.

This case is an appeal from a grant of summary judgment on the question of whether drivers for UberBLACK are employees or independent contractors within the meaning of the Fair Labor Standards Act ("FLSA"), 29 U.S.C. §§ 201-219, and similar Pennsylvania state laws. For the following reasons, we will vacate the District Court's grant of summary judgment and remand for further proceedings.

##### I. Facts

Plaintiffs Ali Razak, Kenan Sabani, and Khaldoun Cherdoud are Pennsylvania drivers who utilize Defendant Uber Technologies' ride-sharing mobile phone application ("Driver App"). Plaintiffs bring this action on behalf of a putative class of all persons who provide limousine services, now known as UberBLACK, through Defendant's Driver App in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.Plaintiffs bring individual and representative claims against Uber Technologies, Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiary, Gegen, LLC, ("Gegen," and collectively, "Uber") for violations of the federal minimum wage and overtime requirements under the FLSA, the Pennsylvania Minimum Wage Act ("PMWA"), and the Pennsylvania Wage Payment and Collection Law ("WPCL").

Plaintiffs Razak, Sabani, and Cherdoud each own and operate independent transportation companies ("ITCs") Luxe Limousine Services, Inc. ("Luxe"), Freemo Limo, LLC ("Freemo"), and Milano Limo, Inc. ("Milano"), respectively. In order for drivers to contract to drive for Uber-BLACK, they must form ITCs. Each ITC, in turn, enters into a Technology Services Agreement with Uber. The Technology Services Agreement includes a Software License and Online Services Agreement that allows UberBLACK drivers to utilize the technology service Uber provides to generate leads, as well as outlines the relationship between ITCs and Uber riders, ITCs and Uber, and ITCs and their drivers. Additionally, it describes driver requirements, vehicle requirements, financial terms, and contains an arbitration clause for dispute resolution between ITCs and Uber.

Uber also requires that drivers sign a Driver Addendum, which is a legal agreement between the ITC and the for-hire driver, before a driver can utilize the Driver App. The Driver Addendum allows a driver to receive "lead generation and related services" through Uber's Driver App. App. 409. The Addendum also outlines driver requirements (such as maintaining a valid driver's license), insurance requirements, dispute resolution, and the "Driver's Relationship with Uber," in which Uber uses clear language to attempt to establish the parameters of the Driver's working relationship with Uber.[^Razak6] For UberBLACK, Uber holds a certificate of public convenience from, and is licensed by, the Philadelphia Parking Authority ("PPA") to operate a limousine company. Transportation companies and individual transportation providers who provide Black car services in Philadelphia are required to hold a PPA certificate of public convenience or associate with an entity that holds such a certificate. Some Uber-BLACK transportation providers operate under the PPA certificate held by Uber. Luxe, an ITC owned by Razak, operates under its own PPA certificate. Additionally, approximately 75% of UberBLACK drivers use Uber's automobile insurance.

Plaintiffs claim that they are employees, and sue Uber for violations of minimum wage and overtime requirements under federal and state laws. Under the FLSA, employers must pay employees the applicable minimum wage for each hour worked, and, if an employee works more than forty hours in a given week, the employer must pay one and a half (1½) times the regular rate for each hour subsequently worked. Plaintiffs contend that time spent online on the Uber Driver App qualifies as compensable time under the FLSA. Principal among Plaintiffs' arguments is that Uber controls the access and use of the Driver App.

To access Uber services, drivers open the Driver App on a mobile device, log in, and tap a button to be online. Once online, a driver can choose to accept a trip, but if the driver does not accept the trip within fifteen seconds of the trip request, it is deemed rejected by the driver. The Driver App will automatically route the trip request to the next closest driver, and if no other driver accepts the trip, the trip request goes unfulfilled, as Uber cannot require any driver to accept a trip. Uber-BLACK drivers are free to reject trips for any reason, aside from unlawful discrimination. However, if a driver ignores three trip requests in a row, the Uber Driver App will automatically move the driver from online to offline, such that he cannot accept additional trip requests.

Uber sets the financial terms of all UberBLACK fares, and riders pay by having their credit cards linked to the App. After a ride is completed, Uber charges the rider's credit card for the fare. Uber then deposits the money into the transportation company's Uber account with a commission taken out by Uber. The transportation company then distributes the payment to the driver who provided the ride.

Uber also has regulations under which it logs off drivers for a period of six hours if the driver reaches Uber's twelve-hour driving limit. Trip requests are generally sent to the driver closest in proximity to the requesting rider, and drivers have no way of knowing from the Uber Driver App what the demand for drivers is at any given time (and thus, how much their earnings will be based on that demand). Drivers also do not know where a rider's final destination is prior to accepting the ride.

There is one exception affecting a driver's ability to accept trip requests from anywhere in Philadelphia. If a driver is at one of Philadelphia's major transportation hubs: 30th Street Train Station or Philadelphia International Airport, he must utilize a "queue" system that routes trips to the next driver in the queue, and the driver can only enter, or advance in, the queue while physically located inside a designated zone.

On appeal, Uber reasserts that Plaintiffs are not employees as a matter of law, and therefore, their putative class action should be subject to summary judgment. To support this contention, Uber portrays UberBLACK drivers as entrepreneurs who utilize Uber as a software platform to acquire trip requests. Uber asserts that Plaintiffs are not restricted from working for other companies, pay their own expenses, and on some occasions, engage workers for their own ITCs. They can use UberBLACK as little or as much as they want or choose not to work for Uber-BLACK and instead work for competitors such as Blacklane and Lyft.

Uber asserts that it places no restrictions on drivers' ability to engage in personal activities while online. Plaintiffs in this matter engaged in a range of personal activities, including accepting rides from private clients, accepting rides from other rideshare programs, sleeping, running personal errands, smoking cigarettes, taking personal phone calls, rejecting Uber-BLACK trips because they were tired, and conducting personal business.

Alternatively, Plaintiffs claim that they are "employees" under the FLSA because they are controlled by Uber when they are online and perform an integral role for Uber's business. The District Court agreed with Uber's position, and granted Uber's Motion for Summary Judgment on the question of whether Plaintiffs qualify as "employees" of Uber under the FLSA and PMWA. Plaintiffs now appeal from the summary judgment order.

[ *** ]

##### III. Applicable Law: _Donovan v. DialAmerica Marketing, Inc._

The minimum wage and overtime wage provisions at issue all require that Plaintiffs prove that they are "employees." Although Plaintiffs' case includes claims under the PMWA, Pennsylvania state courts have looked to federal law regarding the FLSA for guidance in applying the PMWA. The FLSA defines "employer" as "includ[ing] any person acting directly or indirectly in the interest of an employer in relation to an employee," and "employee" as "any individual employed by an employer." 29 U.S.C. §§ 203(d), (e)(1). Given the circularity of the definitions, federal courts, with guidance from the Department of Labor, have established standards to determine how to define employee and employer.

The Third Circuit utilizes the test out-lined in _Donovan v. DialAmerica Marketing, Inc.,_ 757 F.2d 1376 (3d Cir. 1985), to determine employee status under the FLSA. This seminal case acknowledges that when Congress promulgated the FLSA, it intended it to have the "broadest definition of 'employee.'" In _DialAmerica,_ we used six factors—and indeed adopted the Ninth Circuit's test—to determine whether a worker is an employee under the FLSA:

> 1) the degree of the alleged employer's right to control the manner in which the work is to be performed; 2) the alleged employee's opportunity for profit or loss depending upon his managerial skill; 3) the alleged employee's investment in equipment or materials required for his task, or his employment of helpers; 4) whether the service rendered required a special skill; 5) the degree of permanence of the working relationship; [and] 6) whether the service rendered is an integral part of the alleged employer's business.

Our decision in _DialAmerica_ is consistent with the Supreme Court's general guidance in _Rutherford Food Corp. v. McComb,_ 331 U.S. 722 (1947). In _Rutherford,_ the Supreme Court first determined "employee" status under the FLSA. And in _DialAmerica,_ we agreed with _Sureway Cleaners_ that "neither the presence nor absence of any particular factor is dispositive." Therefore, "courts should examine the circumstances of the whole activity," determining whether, "as a matter of economic reality, the individuals are dependent upon the business to which they render service." The burden lies with Plaintiffs to prove that they are employees. 

##### IV. The District Court Opinion

The District Court granted summary judgment to Uber ruling that drivers for UberBLACK are independent contractors within the meaning of the FLSA and similar Pennsylvania laws. The District Court, in applying the six factors, relied heavily on the analysis in _DialAmerica_ and other cases that had examined the use of internet or app-based programs for acquiring work.

The District Court applied all six factors in _DialAmerica,_ and on balance, found that Plaintiffs were independent contractors. There were four factors the Court applied that were interpreted in favor of independent contractor status. The District Court analyzed the employer's right to control the manner in which the work is to be performed and noted that the written agreements entered into by the Plaintiffs and their transportation companies, in addition to the ability of Plaintiffs to hire sub-contractors and work for competing companies, point to a lack of control by Uber. Next, the District Court analyzed the alleged employees' opportunity for profit or loss and found that this also supports independent contractor status. The District Court found that Plaintiffs can work as much or as little as they would like and choose not to accept trip requests where the opportunity for profit was greater to work for themselves or competitors. Because the "profit-loss" factor does not require that Plaintiffs be solely in control of their profits or losses, Plaintiffs were unsuccessful in convincing the District Court that they were employees despite the fact that Uber retains the right to determine how much to charge passengers and which driver receives which trip request. UberBLACK drivers must purchase or lease their own expensive vehicle to drive for UberBLACK, demonstrating independent status as well. And the "relationship permanence" can be as long or non-existent as the driver desires, again illustrating the impermanent working relationships often found with independent contractors.

The District Court determined that only two factors militated in Plaintiffs' favor. As limousine drivers, the service they render does not really require a special skill. Second, the limousine driving service rendered to Uber by UberBLACK drivers is an essential part of Uber's business as a transportation company. The District Court held that the movant demonstrated that there was no genuine dispute as to any material fact, and that a majority of the _DialAmerica_ factors leaned against employment status. The District Court granted Uber's motion for summary judgment and determined that Plaintiffs were independent contractors.

[ *** ]

##### VI. Analysis

###### A. Genuine Disputes of Material Fact Exist

For summary judgment to have been appropriate, there must have been no genuine disputes as to any material facts on the record, entitling Uber to judgment as a matter of law. As such, if there is a genuine dispute of material fact, the question of which _DialAmerica_ factors favor employee status is a question of fact that should go to a fact-finder. Here, the ultimate question of law is whether Plaintiffs are employees or independent contractors, which is for a judge to decide. But, if a court finds that there are any issues of [material] fact that remain in [genuine] dispute, it must resolve those disputes prior to granting summary judgment. In _DialAmerica,_ the parties stipulated to some facts and reserved the right to present testimony on any remaining disputed issues. Then, the district court held an evidentiary hearing on the remaining disputed issues of fact:

> (1) the extent to which home researchers and distributors were dependent on DialAmerica;

> (2) the extent to which they had an opportunity for profit or loss;

> (3) the extent to which they exercised initiative, business judgment, or foresight in their activities;

> (4) the extent of any financial investment in conjunction with their work for DialAmerica; and

> (5) the extent to which the services provided by the home researchers and distributors were an integral part of DialAmerica's business.

These factual issues refer directly to the factors which determine whether someone is an employee or independent contractor. The district court resolved these disputes and granted DialAmerica's motion for summary judgment. We reviewed the district court's decision in _DialAmerica_ and determined that summary judgment was a mischaracterization, but the proper outcome, as all the factual disputes were resolved prior to adjudication on the merits.

_DialAmerica_ teaches that where there are [genuine] questions of [material] fact that need resolution, these questions must go to a fact-finder. This case presents such genuine disputes of material facts. Uber submitted a Statement of Undisputed Material Facts to which Plaintiffs responded with almost a hundred pages of disputes. For example, disputed facts include whether Plaintiffs are operating within Uber's system and under Uber's rules, and whether Plaintiffs or their corporations contracted directly with Uber. Although the District Court states that its decision derived from undisputed facts, the disputes presented by the parties go to the core of the _DialAmerica_ factors and present a genuine dispute of material facts. Accordingly, we will remand to the District Court as summary judgment was inappropriate.

###### B. The "Right to Control" Factor

To illustrate that there are genuine disputes remaining, we look to the first _DialAmerica_ factor: "the degree of the alleged employer's right to control the manner in which the work is to be performed." While not dispositive, this factor is highly relevant to the FLSA analysis. The District Court in this case held that the first factor supported a finding of independent contractor status. Actual control of the manner of work is not essential; rather, it is the right to control which is determinative. 

The parties contest whether Uber exercises control over drivers. While Uber categorizes drivers as using the Uber App to "connect with riders using the Uber-BLACK product," which may imply that drivers independently contract with riders through the platform, Plaintiffs contend that this is not so. Uber also contends that drivers can drive for other services while driving for Uber, however Plaintiffs contend that while "online" for Uber, they cannot also accept rides through other platforms. Plaintiffs reference Uber's Driver Deactivation Policy that establishes that "soliciting payment of fares outside the Uber system leads to deactivation" and "activities conducted outside of Uber's system—like anonymous pickups—are prohibited." 

Uber also asserts that it does not control the "schedule start or stop times" for drivers or "require them to work for a set number of hours." Again, Plaintiffs dispute this, stating that the Uber Owner/Operator Agreement states, "[the] frequency with which [Uber] offers Requests to [the driver] under this Agreement shall be in the sole discretion of the Company" and "the number of trip requests available to Plaintiffs is largely driven by Uber."

The above factual disputes all go to whether Uber retains the right to control the Plaintiffs' work. The District Court in its analysis acknowledged what the Plaintiffs asserted, but assigned little value to their assertions in light of Uber's contractual agreement with Plaintiffs, Uber's assertion that Plaintiffs are permitted to hire sub-contractors, and that "plaintiffs and their helpers are permitted to work for competing companies." However, whether Plaintiffs are considered to "work" for a competing company while being "online" on the Uber Driver App is also a disputed factual issue. This illustrates why summary judgment was inappropriate at this stage.

Further, these and other disputed facts regarding control demonstrate why this case was not ripe for summary judgment. For example, Plaintiffs assert that "Uber does punish drivers for cancelling trips," and "Uber coerces UberBLACK drivers to go online and accept trips by making automatic weekly deductions against their account." Plaintiffs additionally assert that they derived all of their income for their respective businesses from Uber in certain years, which Uber disputes.

Although both parties argue that there are no genuine disputes regarding control, the facts adduced show otherwise. While Uber determines what drivers are paid and directs drivers where to drop off passengers, it lacks the right to control when drivers must drive. UberBLACK drivers exercise a high level of control, as they can drive as little or as much as they desire, without losing their ability to drive for UberBLACK. However, Uber deactivates drivers who fall short of the 4.7-star Uber-BLACK driver rating and limits the number of consecutive hours that a driver may work.

###### C. Opportunity for Profit or Loss Depending on Managerial Skill

As with the right to control, the District Court held that there was no genuine dispute as to another factor—the opportunity for profit or loss depending on managerial skill. Again, we disagree with the District Court's conclusion. The District Court, in this case, ruled that this factor strongly favored independent contractor status because drivers could be strategic in determining when, where, and how to utilize the Driver App to obtain more lucrative trip requests and to generate more profits. Plaintiffs could also work for competitors and transport private clients.[^Razak9]

However, other material facts reveal that there was and still is a genuine dispute. For example, Uber decides (1) the fare; (2) which driver receives a trip request; (3) whether to refund or cancel a passenger's fare; and (4) a driver's territory, which is subject to change without notice. Moreover, Plaintiffs can drive for competitors, but Uber may attempt to frustrate those who try, and most of the factors that determine an UberBLACK driver's Uber-profit, like advertising and price setting, are also controlled by Uber.[^Razak10] Under the circumstances, we believe that a reasonable fact-finder could rule in favor of Plaintiffs.[^Razak11] Thus, summary judgment was inappropriate.

###### D. Remaining _DialAmerica_ Factor Analysis

Of the remaining factors, some do not require further factfinding, while others still do. The fifth factor, degree of permanence of the working relationship, has genuine disputes of material fact. On one hand, Uber can take drivers offline, and on the other hand, Plaintiffs can drive whenever they choose to turn on the Driver App, with no minimum amount of driving time required.

Alternatively, the fourth factor, whether the service rendered requires a special skill, is clearer. It is generally accepted that "driving" is not itself a "special skill." Although there may be a distinction between "driving" and "replicat[ing] the limousine experience," as noted by the District Court, it is not enough to overcome the presumption that driving is not a special skill. This fourth factor certainly weighs in favor of finding that Plaintiffs are employees.[^Razak12]

##### VII. Conclusion

In reviewing the District Court decision _de novo,_ we determine summary judgment was inappropriate because genuine disputes of material facts remained.  [ ... ] For the foregoing reasons, we will remand the matter for further proceedings.

[^Razak6]: (n.6 in opinion) Boilerplate language in the Driver Addendum to the Technology Services Agreement sets forth, among other things, that ITCs "acknowledge[] and agree[] that Uber is a technology services provider" that "does not provide transportation services, function as a transportation carrier, nor operate[s] as a broker for transportation of passengers. . . ." App. 13. "ITCs shall provide all necessary equipment; Uber does not direct or control ITCs or their drivers generally or in their performance." "ITCs and their drivers retain the sole right to determine when, where, and for how long each of them will utilize the Driver App or the Uber Service, and ITCs agree to pay Uber a service fee on a per transportation services transaction basis." ITCs must also "maintain during the term of this Agreement workers' compensation insurance for itself and any of its subcontractors. . . ." The Driver Addendum also sets forth and requires that the relationship between the ITCs and their drivers is "contractual or [an] employment arrangement." 

[^Razak9]: (n.9 in opinion) Indeed, the District Court stressed Plaintiffs' ability "to make money elsewhere[.]" Yet, based on our precedent, it is unclear whether this factor looks only toward opportunity for profit or loss _within_ the alleged employment relationship or whether it also contemplates one's ability to make money elsewhere—as such, external factors, such as the ability to earn outside revenue without terminating the Uber-driver relationship, may be irrelevant to the analysis. As this argument was not able to be developed by the parties, this, along with other material factual disputes, is ripe to be developed at trial.

[^Razak10]: (n.10 in opinion) The District Court also considered "Plaintiffs investments in their own companies" as "relevant to the 'profit and loss' factor," as weighing "heavily in favor of 'independent contractor' status." But, as stated earlier, parties frame this issue differently and assert different facts—again showing that summary judgment was inappropriate. For example, Uber asserts that Plaintiff Razak's ITC Luxe Limousine Services, Inc. invested in up to sixteen vehicles and had as many as fourteen to seventeen drivers. And while Plaintiffs do not deny that they invested in their personal vehicles, which they use to provide UberBLACK rides, as discussed already, there is an inherent dispute regarding whether drivers are allowed to exercise judgment and select the farthest rides for the largest payment, as Uber determines which driver is given which rider.

[^Razak11]: (n.11 in opinion) We also note that the District Court did not interpret whether Plaintiffs could in actuality exercise any managerial skill while being "online" to increase their profits, only that they could potentially choose to perform other jobs to make a greater profit.

[^Razak12]: (n.12 in opinion) Lastly, the District Court found that the work UberBLACK drivers provide is integral to the service Uber renders under the sixth _DialAmerica_ factor. Simply put by the District Court, "it seems beyond dispute that if Uber could not find drivers, Uber would not be able to function." We acknowledge that Uber strenuously disputes this finding, insisting instead that it is a technology company that supports drivers' transportation businesses, and not a transportation company that employs drivers. We also believe this could be a disputed material fact that should be resolved by a fact-finder.

## 1.3 Distinguishing Employees from Interns or Students 

### Wang v. Hearst Corp. 

#### 877 F.3d 69 (2d Cir. 2017)

##### DENNIS JACOBS, Circuit Judge.

Five participants in internship programs offered by defendant Hearst Corporation ("Hearst") sue for minimum wage under the Fair Labor Standards Act ("FLSA") and the New York Labor Law ("NYLL"). At issue is whether the unpaid interns were "employees" of Hearst for the purposes of the FLSA under [Glatt v. Fox Searchlight Pictures, Inc.](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8101135012881799928), 811 F.3d 528 (2d Cir. 2016)]. We affirm the judgment of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, for the reasons stated in Judge Oetken's thorough opinion.

##### I

The question is whether Hearst furnishes bona fide for-credit internships or whether it exploits student-interns to avoid hiring and compensating entry-level employees. The factual record is voluminous and advances multiple narratives, some of them contradictory; but the following essentials are undisputed.

Hearst maintained dozens of internship programs with its various print magazines. Each of five named appellants worked at one time as interns in one of these programs. These internships were unpaid, carried no expectation of eventual full-time employment, and required intern candidates to receive prior approval for college credit to participate. No intern alleges that Hearst promised compensation or a future job.

The interns' individual experiences varied, but there are groupings. Four of the appellants-Alexandra Rappaport, Erin Spencer, Matthew Wagster, and Sarah Wheels-were enrolled in college during their internships. Rappaport, Spencer, and Wheels completed their internships during the summer between academic years, and Wagster interned (with _Esquire_) during his fall semester. Lead plaintiff Xuedan Wang interned for one semester between her graduation from college and the start of her graduate program in the Fashion Marketing program at Parsons School of Design. Each intern received prior approval for college credit, although not all of them ultimately received credit from their degree-awarding institution: Wang had received permission for continuing education credit but ultimately did not pursue it, Wagster was denied credit from his institution because his internship was not applicable to his major, and Wheels received credit from a local community college.

Each student had an academic or aspiring professional connection to fashion. Wang and Spencer studied fashion in college, and Spencer's internship satisfied a graduation requirement (the Fieldwork course) for his major; Rappaport and Wagster were majoring in the social sciences, but hoped to break into the fashion industry; Wheels was an English major who interned in the editorial department of _Cosmopolitan_ to advance her writing career. All of them testified or declared that they performed a range of tasks related to their professional pursuits in the Hearst internship programs, and gained valuable knowledge and skills.

At the same time, the interns share common complaints. They describe many tasks in Hearst's fashion closets as menial and repetitive. Several claim that they did not receive close supervision or guidance and that the internships offered little formal training—in contrast to their academic experiences in school. One common grievance was that the interns mastered most of their tasks within a couple weeks, but did the same work for the duration of the internship.

In February 2012, lead plaintiff Xuedan Wang filed suit alleging that she and a putative class of interns across Hearst's magazine departments were deprived of wages in violation of the FLSA and NYLL. Seven other interns opted in after the district court granted the case collective certification. The district court's denial of plaintiffs' motion for partial summary judgment was vacated in this Court for reconsideration in light of Glatt v. Fox Searchlight Pictures, Inc., which was heard in tandem with Wang. 

Hearst moved for summary judgment against the six remaining plaintiffs under the Glatt test. The district court granted the motion, and five plaintiffs filed a timely appeal. 

##### II

The FLSA defines "employee" by tautology: an "individual employed by an employer." 29 U.S.C. § 203(e)(1). The standard for "employee" is broad, but the Supreme Court has long recognized that not every individual who performs a service for an employer qualifies as an "employee" under the FLSA. "[E]mployee" status depends upon the "economic reality" of the relationship between the putative employer and employee. 

Last year in Glatt, we recognized the "primary beneficiary" test as the way to distinguish employees from bona fide interns. To guide our "flexible" analysis, we provided seven non-exhaustive considerations specific to the context of unpaid internships:

> 1. The extent to which the intern and the employer clearly understand that there is no expectation of compensation. Any promise of compensation, express or implied, suggests that the intern is an employee—and vice versa;

> 2. The extent to which the internship provides training that would be similar to that which would be given in an educational environment, including the clinical and other hands-on training provided by educational institutions;

> 3. The extent to which the internship is tied to the intern's formal education program by integrated coursework or the receipt of academic credit;

> 4. The extent to which the internship accommodates the intern's academic commitments by corresponding to the academic calendar;

> 5. The extent to which the internship's duration is limited to the period in which the internship provides the intern with beneficial learning;

> 6. The extent to which the intern's work complements, rather than displaces, the work of paid employees while providing significant educational benefits to the intern;

> 7. The extent to which the intern and the employer understand that the internship is conducted without entitlement to a paid job at the conclusion of the internship.

The court applies these considerations by weighing and balancing the totality of the circumstances. "No one factor is dispositive and every factor need not point in the same direction for the court to conclude that the intern is not an employee."

The totality of the circumstances should be considered in view of the "purpose of a bona fide internship ... to integrate classroom learning with practical skill development in a real-world setting." In a break from previous tests, courts applying Glatt have acknowledged that the internship may provide a direct benefit to the employer so long as the intern receives identifiable educational or vocational benefits in return.

Judge Oetken analyzed each Glatt factor and determined that all of them except the sixth (displacement of paid employees) either favored Hearst to some degree or were neutral. In assessing the totality of the circumstances, the court concluded that the "Plaintiffs were interns rather than employees as a matter of law."

##### III

###### A. Factors One and Seven

The appellants concede that factors one and seven (expectation of payment and entitlement to a job, respectively) favor Hearst. They argue, however, that these factors bear little weight because FLSA rights cannot be waived. The interns' reading of these factors defies the clear mandate of Glatt, which explained that "[a]ny promise of compensation, express or implied, suggests that the intern is an employee—_and vice versa._". These factors are crucial to understanding the "economic reality" of the internship relationship; where, as here, the programs were described specifically as unpaid internships for students—and students applied to the internships with that unambiguous understanding—the relationship is far less likely to take on an abusive quality.

###### B. Factors Two and Five

The second factor (training) is at the heart of the dispute on appeal. The interns argue forcefully that Judge Oetken misconstrued this factor by broadening the ambit of "training" to include "practical skills." Wagster contends that the experience of having "s[a]t in on marketing meetings" should have been discounted by his assignment to "take meeting minutes." Similarly, appellants argue that we should disregard Spencer's experience "learn[ing] about photo shoots" because she already knew how to use a camera. The interns would thus limit the discussion of beneficial training under the second factor to education that resembles university pedagogy to the exclusion of tasks that apply specific skills to the professional environment.

Appellants' interpretation ignores our instruction in Glatt that a key element of the intern relationship is "the expectation of receiving educational _or vocational benefits._" Glatt clearly contemplates that training opportunities offered to the intern include "product[s] of experiences on the job." The appellants' tacit assumption is that professions, trades, and arts are or should be just like school; but many useful internships are designed to correct that impression.

The interns argue that the district court "ignored" evidence that Hearst's internships were a poor substitute for classroom learning. In fact, the court accepted the complaints as true, and for that reason, concluded that the factor weighed only "slightly" in favor of Hearst. At the same time, it recognized that those complaints do not wholly offset the undisputed fact that the internships _did_ provide beneficial training. For this reason, the appellants also misread the closely related fifth Glatt factor (valuable duration) in arguing that the interns were not receiving "beneficial learning" when they performed repetitive or similar tasks they had already "learned." As exemplified by the meeting minutes and photoshoots, practical skill may entail practice, and an intern gains familiarity with an industry by day to day professional experience. 

###### C. Factors Three and Four

The third and fourth Glatt factors relate to the integration of the internship to the student-intern's academic program and academic calendar, respectively. Both parties and the district court acknowledge that the interns' experiences diverge with respect to these factors. In general, however, the internships were arranged to fit the academic calendar and required academic credit as a prerequisite.

Factor three (academic integration) clearly favors Hearst for all interns except Wagster. For some interns, the connection is straightforward. Spencer's internship was a graduation requirement for his major. Wheels' internship with the editorial department of a magazine meshed with her academic major in English and professional interest in writing. And while Rappaport's internship did not "integrat[e]" with "coursework" from her international relations major, she discussed the internship with her college faculty, wrote a paper about it, and received class credit for it: her college thus treated the internship as a course.

It is argued that "there was no connection between a formal education program and Wang's internship" in the fashion industry. Appellants' Br. at 37. But Wang interned between the completion of her undergraduate degree in fashion and the start of her graduate degree, also in fashion. She intentionally deferred her start date for graduate school and took a full time internship at a Hearst magazine to gain professional experience. A jury is not necessary to infer from these undisputed facts that Wang's internship "is tied to [her] formal education." That Wang did not receive credit does not undermine the connection between her formal education program and her internship; she did not receive credit because she did not pursue it. As a matter of law, the (undisputed) fact that the program required a student to earn approval from an accredited university for the "receipt of academic credit" generally is more telling than whether credit was actually awarded in that individual's case.

For the majority of the interns here, the undisputed evidence also favors Hearst with respect to the fourth factor (academic calendar). Rappaport, Spencer, and Wheels interned during their college summer breaks in accordance with the school calendar. Wang had deferred her studies to intern between school years, and Wagster was not an active student during his internship. Hearst did not fail to accommodate their academic schedules when they had no schedules to accommodate.

###### D. Factor Six

The sixth factor (displacement) considers the extent to which an intern's work complements the work of paid employees or displaces it. An intern's work is complementary if it requires some level of oversight or involvement by an employee, who may still bear primary responsibility. The district court considered that the sixth factor favored the interns because the interns completed some work regularly performed by paid employees.

This factor alone is not dispositive. An intern may perform complementary tasks and in doing so confer tangible benefits on supervisors. The Glatt factors intentionally omitted a criteria that had been advanced by the Department of Labor that the alleged employer derive no immediate advantage from the activities of the intern. It is no longer a problem that an intern was useful or productive.

###### IV

The facts of this case permit inferences that support Hearst with respect to certain Glatt factors, and inferences that support particular interns with respect to other factors. The interns and amici urge that such mixed inferences foreclose a ruling on summary judgment. We disagree, for the reasons explained by the district court, which weighed all factors under the totality of the circumstances, and concluded that the interns are not "employees" for the purposes of the FLSA.

As the interns observe, these cases do involve a "fact specific" and case-by-case analysis. But "the mere existence of some alleged factual dispute between the parties will not defeat an otherwise properly supported motion for summary judgment; the requirement is that there be no genuine issue of material fact." Status as an "employee" for the purposes of the FLSA is a matter of law, and under our summary judgment standard, a district court can strike a balance on the totality of the circumstances to rule for one side or the other. 

There are contested issues that bear on the quality of each intern's experience. The crucial point is that a district court may rule on summary judgment if it can weigh the Glatt factors on the basis of facts that are not in dispute. As the district court recognized, the internships "involved varying amounts of rote work and could have been more ideally structured to maximize their educational potential," but concluded that these critiques did not give rise to a material factual dispute.

##### CONCLUSION

The judgment is affirmed.


### Dawson v. NCAA 

#### 932 F.3d 905 (9th Cir. 2019)

##### THOMAS, Judge:

We consider whether Lamar Dawson and Division I Football Bowl Subdivision ("FBS") Football Players are employees of the National Collegiate Athletic Association ("NCAA") and PAC-12 Conference ("PAC-12") within the meaning of the Fair Labor Standards Act ("FLSA") and California labor law. [ ... ] Because the claims fail as a matter of law, we affirm the judgment of the district court.

##### I

Dawson played football for the University of Southern California ("USC"), a Division I FBS member of the NCAA's PAC-12 Conference. In this putative class action case, Dawson does not allege that he was an employee of USC, so the pure question of employment is not before us, and we need not consider whether he had employment status as a football player, nor whether USC was an employer. That question is left, if at all, for another day. Rather, the only issue before us is whether the NCAA and PAC-12 were his employers under federal and state law.

The NCAA is an "unincorporated not-for-profit educational organization" comprised of more than 1,100 colleges and universities throughout the United States. NCAA member schools are organized into three Divisions based on the number and quality of opportunities that the schools provide to participate in intercollegiate athletics. Division I consists of approximately 351 schools. Approximately 253 Division I schools have Division I football programs, of which approximately 128 fall within the FBS. The PAC-12 is an unincorporated association which operates a multi-sport collegiate athletic conference, and is a formal conference member of the NCAA Division I FBS.

NCAA member schools "agree to administer their athletics programs in accordance with the constitution, bylaws, and other legislation of the [NCAA]." The NCAA's constitution and bylaws establish academic eligibility requirements, provide guidelines and restrictions for recruitment, impose limits on the number and size of athletic scholarships, and regulate the scheduling and conditions of practice and games.

The NCAA bylaws also govern financial aid and prohibit compensation for student-athletes. Bylaw 15.1 provides that student-athletes may receive financial aid on the basis of athletic ability, but that the amount of aid must not exceed "the value of his or her cost of attendance." Student-athletes receiving aid in excess of the cost of attendance limitation "shall not be eligible to participate in intercollegiate athletics."

NCAA Bylaw 12.1.4 provides that financial aid is "not considered to be pay or the promise of pay for athletics skill." Bylaw 12.1.2 further prohibits any payment to a student-athlete for athletic services. Student-athletes who accept payments may be subject to revocation of their amateur status and eligibility under seven conditions.[^Dawson2]

In his complaint, Dawson alleged that the NCAA and the PAC-12 acted as an employer of the class members by "prescribing the terms and conditions under which student-athletes perform services." Dawson claims that the NCAA and PAC-12, as joint employers, failed to pay wages, including overtime pay, to Dawson and to class members in violation of federal and state labor laws.

The NCAA and the PAC-12 moved to dismiss Dawson's complaint for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. The district court granted the motion, and dismissed the complaint without leave to amend.

##### II

The district court properly concluded that Division I FBS Football Players are not employees of the NCAA or PAC-12 as a matter of federal law.

###### A

The FLSA provides that "employers" must pay their "employees" a minimum wage and overtime pay for hours worked in excess of the statutory workweek. The statute defines an "employee" as "any individual employed by an employer." To "employ" means "to suffer or permit to work." 

The FLSA definition of employee is "exceedingly broad," but "does have its limits." "An individual may work for a covered enterprise and nevertheless not be an 'employee.'" For example, an individual "who, 'without any express or implied compensation agreement, might work for their own advantage on the premises of another'" falls outside the FLSA definition of employee. 

Ultimately, "[t]he test of employment under the [FLSA] is one of 'economic reality.'" Economic reality accounts for "the circumstances of the whole activity" rather than considering "isolated factors" determinative. 

The Supreme Court has found a number of circumstances relevant in evaluating economic reality, including: (1) expectation of compensation; (2) the power to hire and fire, ; (3) and evidence that an arrangement was "conceived or carried out" to evade the law. We apply these guiding principles in our analysis, and conclude that the economic reality of the relationship between the NCAA/PAC-12 and student-athletes does not reflect an employment relationship.

###### 1

We need not address whether Dawson's scholarship engendered an "expectation of compensation" or whether his scholarship amounted to compensation because he did not receive the scholarship from the NCAA or the PAC-12. The NCAA Bylaws reveal that member schools themselves award and distribute the financial aid Dawson alleges constitutes expected compensation. _See_ 2015-16 NCAA Division I Manual, NCAA Bylaw 15.01.6 (prohibiting "institutions" from awarding aid to a student-athlete in excess of cost of attendance).

Dawson's theory is that NCAA regulations prohibit NCAA student-athletes from accepting compensation beyond scholarships limited to cost of attendance. He does not claim that the defendants provide scholarships; whether "compensation" or not, scholarship funding comes from his school. The limitation on scholarships does not, as a matter of law, create any expectation of compensation from the NCAA/PAC-12.

Thus, on the undisputed facts, neither the NCAA nor PAC-12 provided Dawson with a scholarship or any expectation of a scholarship.

###### 2

Similarly, on this record, Dawson cannot demonstrate that the NCAA or the PAC-12 had the power to fire or hire him. Dawson alleges that the NCAA/PAC-12 assert complete control over the lives of student-athletes, on and off campus, including a student-athlete's: "(a) living arrangements; (b) athletic eligibility; (c) permissible compensation; (d) allowable behavior; (e) academic performance; (f) use of alcohol and drugs; and (g) gambling." Dawson alleges that the penalties for violating these rules include "loss of financial aid and eligibility for sports." Dawson also alleges that the NCAA/PAC-12 control and regulate student-athletes' "training and game schedules, academic schedules, and other collegiate activities."

The NCAA Bylaws pervasively regulate college athletics. The complaint, however, does not allege that the NCAA/PAC-12 "hire and fire," or exercise any other analogous control, over student-athletes. The complaint does not allege, and moreover, the record does not demonstrate, that the NCAA and PAC-12 choose the players on any Division I football team, nor that they engage in the actual supervision of the players' performance. Rather, the allegations of the complaint, taken as true, demonstrate that the NCAA functions as a regulator, and that the NCAA member schools, for whom the student-athletes allegedly render services, enforce regulations.

In sum, on this record, Dawson cannot demonstrate that the NCAA or the PAC-12 had the power to fire or hire him.

###### 3

Finally, there is no evidence tendered by Dawson that the NCAA rules were "conceived or carried out" to evade the law. The relevant rules were first promulgated in the early 1920's, and some version of them has "existed for a long time." In contrast, Congress enacted the FLSA in 1938. Even though "economic reality" in college sports is much different today, there is no evidence on this record that the NCAA rules were "conceived or carried out" to evade the law.

###### 4

The Supreme Court has also considered more specific factors when helpful to probe the economic reality of a particular situation. In this context, Dawson argues that the labor of student-athletes generates substantial revenue for the NCAA and PAC-12, and that this "economic reality" alters the analysis.

However, precedent demonstrates that revenue does not automatically engender or foreclose the existence of an employment relationship under the FLSA. The Supreme Court has held self-proclaimed volunteers to be employees of a nonprofit religious organization. Conversely, we recently held that cosmetology students were not employees entitled to minimum wage despite the fact that they performed services for paying customers at salons run by their schools. Therefore, in the context of our preceding analysis, the revenue generated by college sports does not unilaterally convert the relationship between student-athletes and the NCAA into an employment relationship.

###### B

_Bonnette v. California Health and Welfare Agency,_ 704 F.2d 1465 (9th Cir. 1983), does not compel a contrary conclusion, as Dawson contends. In _Bonnette,_ we applied a four-factor test to probe the economic reality of the relationship between state agencies and chore workers hired to perform in-home care for disabled public service recipients. 

The _Bonnette_ factors ask "whether the alleged employer (1) had the power to hire and fire the employees, (2) supervised and controlled employee work schedules or conditions of employment, (3) determined the rate and method of payment, and (4) maintained employment records." These factors prove "particularly appropriate where (as in _Bonnette_ itself) it is clear that some entity is an 'employer' and the question is which one." Under the _Bonnette_ test, however, the NCAA and PAC-12 are clearly not Dawson's employers. They do not admit him to the school or pick him for the team; they cannot remove him from the team; they do not supervise his schedules or activities in practices or games; they do not maintain his scholastic records; and, although they put caps on what he may receive as a scholarship, they do not determine whether he gets a scholarship or in what amount.

Similarly, _Benjamin_ does not alter our conclusion. In _Benjamin,_ we applied a seven-factor "primary beneficiary test" to evaluate economic reality in the vocational student-employee context. The primary beneficiary test looks to "seven non-exhaustive factors for courts to weigh and balance[.]"

_Benjamin_ is not useful in determining whether an employment relationship exists between Dawson and the defendants. _Benjamin_ involved vocational students earning academic credit necessary to take a state licensing exam. _Id._ at 1142. In contrast, student-athletes are participating in highly regulated extra-curricular activities. Thus, _Benjamin's_ "primary beneficiary test" fails to "capture the true nature" of the relationship at issue here. 

###### C

In sum, the district court correctly held that the NCAA and the PAC-12 were not Dawson's employers. Within the analytical framework established by the Supreme Court, the NCAA and PAC-12 are regulatory bodies, not employers of student-athletes under the FLSA. The district court properly dismissed the FLSA claims.

[ *** ]

##### IV

For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the district court's dismissal of Dawson's FLSA and California state law claims against the NCAA and PAC-12. We need not, and do not, reach any other issue urged by the parties, nor do we express an opinion about student-athletes' employment status in any other context.

[^Dawson2]: (n.2 in opinion) Bylaw 12.1.2 revokes amateur status and NCAA eligibility where a student-athlete: (1) "[u]ses his or her athletics skill (directly or indirectly) for pay in any form in that sport;" (2) "[a]ccepts a promise of pay even if such pay is to be received following completion of intercollegiate athletics participation;" (3) "[s]igns a contract or commitment of any kind to play professional athletics, regardless of its legal enforceability or any consideration received, except as permitted in Bylaw 12.2.5.1;" (4) "[r]eceives directly or indirectly, a salary, reimbursement of expenses, or any other form of financial assistance from a professional sports organization based on athletics skill or participation, except as permitted by NCAA rules and regulations;" (5) "[c]ompetes on any professional athletics team per Bylaw 12.02.11, even if no pay or remuneration for expenses was received, except as permitted in Bylaw 12.2.3.2.1;" (6) "[a]fter initial full-time collegiate enrollment, enters into a professional draft (see Bylaw 12.2.4);" or (7) "[e]nters into an agreement with an agent."

### Johnson v. NCAA

#### 556 F.Supp.3d 491 (E.D. Pa. 2021)
###### Padova, District Judge.

Plaintiffs, student athletes at five of the Defendant colleges and universities, contend that student athletes who engage in interscholastic athletic activity for their colleges and universities are employees who should be paid for the time they spend related to those athletic activities. Plaintiffs, Ralph "Trey" Johnson, Stephanie Kerkeles, Nicholas Labella, Claudia Ruiz, Jacob Willebeek-Lemair, and Alexa Cooke, assert claims on behalf of themselves, a Fair Labor Standards Act ("FLSA") collective, and three state classes against the colleges and universities they attend (or attended) (the "Attended Schools Defendants," or "ASD"), the National Collegiate Athletic Association ("NCAA"), twenty additional named universities that are members of the NCAA Division I ("D1"), and a putative Defendant class made up of 125 NCAA D1 colleges and universities. The First Amended Complaint ("Complaint") asserts claims for violations of the FLSA, 29 U.S.C. § 200 et seq., the Pennsylvania Minimum Wage Act (the "PMWA"), the New York Labor Law ("NYLL"), and the Connecticut Minimum Wage Act ("CMWA"). The Complaint also asserts three common law unjust enrichment claims. The ASD have moved to dismiss the Complaint pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) on the ground that they do not employ Plaintiffs.[^JohnsonA1] [ ... ] For the reasons that follow, the Motion is denied.

##### I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The Complaint alleges the following facts. The NCAA is an association that regulates intercollegiate sports and has jurisdiction over approximately 1,100 schools and nearly 500,000 student athletes. The NCAA has entered into multi-year, multi-billion-dollar contracts with broadcasters ESPN, CBS, and Turner Sports to show athletic competitions between NCAA D1 member schools, and it distributes shares of those broadcasting fees to its member schools. In addition to shares of broadcasting fees, NCAA D1 member schools also receive fees from multi-year, multi-million-dollar agreements with television and radio networks that they have entered into, either individually or as part of an NCAA conference, to broadcast athletic competitions between NCAA D1 member schools. 

Plaintiff Johnson was a student athlete on the Villanova University NCAA football team from June 2013 until November 18, 2017. Plaintiff Kerkeles has been a student athlete on Fordham University's NCAA swimming and diving team since 2016. Plaintiff Labella was a student athlete on Fordham University's NCAA baseball team during the 2018 and 2019 baseball practice and competition seasons. Plaintiff Ruiz was a student athlete on Sacred Heart University's NCAA tennis team from 2014 to 2018. Plaintiff Willebeek-Lemair was a student athlete on Cornell University's NCAA soccer team during the 2017 and 2018 practice and playing seasons. Plaintiff Cooke has been a student athlete on Lafayette College's NCAA tennis team since 2017. 

The Defendants are the NCAA and 25 NCAA D1 member schools (the "University Defendants"). The ASD are: Villanova University, Fordham University, Sacred Heart University, Cornell University, and Lafayette College. The remaining University Defendants, none of which were attended by the named Plaintiffs, are: Bucknell University, Drexel University, Duquesne University, Fairleigh Dickinson University, La Salle University, Lehigh University, Monmouth University, Princeton University, Rider University, Robert Morris University, Seton Hall University, Saint Francis University, Saint Joseph's University, Saint Peter's University, the University of Delaware, Pennsylvania State University, the University of Pennsylvania, the University of Pittsburgh, Rutgers State University of New Jersey, and Temple University. The Complaint also alleges claims against a putative Defendant class made up of the named University Defendants and 100 additional universities that are members of the NCAA D1. According to the Complaint, these Defendants jointly employed Plaintiffs and similarly situated persons who are members of the putative FLSA Collective. 

Student athletes do not have the option to play NCAA sports for wages at any NCAA D1 school. All member schools in the NCAA have agreed not to pay students to participate in intercollegiate varsity sports. The NCAA's Bylaws prohibit schools from offering wages and prohibit student athletes from accepting wages. A student athlete who participates in NCAA sports can only receive payment based on athletic performance through the U.S. Olympic Committee's ("USOC") Operation Gold program, which pays NCAA-eligible student athletes for winning medals. The USOC Operation Gold program also permits NCAA-eligible student athletes to receive additional pay through USA sport governing bodies and organizations, such as USA Swimming and US Wrestling. 

Student athletes at NCAA D1 schools must schedule classes around their required NCAA athletic activities and cannot reschedule their NCAA athletic activities around their academic programs. As a result, Villanova University only excuses a student athlete from participating in required athletic activities if there is a conflict between practice and a mandatory core class. For example, when Plaintiff Johnson played football at Villanova University he was required to participate in NCAA athletically related activities on weekdays between 5:45 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and could not enroll in a non-core class during that time, including classes that were prerequisites for academic degree programs. In addition, NCAA D1 member schools require student athletes to participate in Countable Athletically Related Activities ("CARA"), which are recorded on timesheets under an NCAA D1 Bylaw. NCAA Bylaws also require student athletes to participate in Required Athletically Related Activities like fundraising and community service. A student athlete who fails to attend meetings, participate in practice, or participate in scheduled competitions can be disciplined, including suspension or dismissal from the team. Because student athletes have to schedule their classes around their required athletic activities, many student athletes have reported that participation in NCAA D1 sports have prevented them from taking classes that they wanted to take. Many student athletes have also reported that their participation in NCAA D1 sports has prevented them from majoring in their preferred major. Student athletes at Villanova University are also required to participate in activities like meals, physical rehabilitation, dressing, showering, and travel that are not considered CARA. They are also encouraged to engage in additional workouts and consultations with coaches that are not counted in CARA. Student athletes have reported spending more than 30 hours per week on athletically related activities, both CARA and non-CARA, and football players who attend schools in the NCAA bowl and championship subdivisions report spending more than 40 hours per week on these activities. 

At the same time, the NCAA procures substantial revenues from sports. In the 2018 fiscal year, the NCAA reported total revenues of $1,064,403,240. These revenues came from fees collected for television and marketing rights, championships, tournaments, and sales. In their 2016 fiscal year, NCAA D1 schools in the football power five subdivision had median total revenues related to NCAA sports of $97,276,000; schools in the football bowl subdivision reported median total revenues related to NCAA sports of $33,470,000; schools in the football championship subdivision had median total revenues related to NCAA sports of $17,409,000; and schools that did not have NCAA football teams reported median total revenues from NCAA sports of $16,018,000. Villanova University in particular had total revenues from NCAA sports of $48,977,278 in its 2018 fiscal year. While student athletes do not receive wages, the NCAA and Villanova University claim that they acquire intangible educational benefits from participating in NCAA sports, including "discipline, work ethic, strategic thinking, time management, leadership, goal setting, and teamwork."

The NCAA D1 member schools exercise significant control over their student athletes. The NCAA Bylaws apply to all student athletes who participate in NCAA sports and they address "recruitment, eligibility, hours of participation, duration of eligibility and discipline." Student athletes who participate in NCAA sports are supervised by coaching and training staff. NCAA D1 member schools are required to have adult supervisors maintain timesheets for participants. They also have handbooks that contain standards for controlling student athletes' performance and conduct. NCAA D1 member schools impose discipline, including suspension and dismissal from a team, in instances of specified misconduct. NCAA D1 member schools also publish supplemental handbooks with standards that are used to control the performance and conduct of student athletes both on and off the field. These handbooks contain rules regarding agents, prohibiting certain categories of legal gambling, and restricting social media use, including restrictions on making derogatory comments about other teams. NCAA D1 member schools also have NCAA team policies that restrict the legal consumption of alcohol and legal use of nicotine products by student athletes.

Based upon these factual allegations, the Complaint asserts that Plaintiffs are the employees of Defendants, including the ASD, and it asserts eight claims for relief, seeking payment of wages for the time Plaintiffs spent engaged in activities connected to NCAA sports. Count I asserts claims pursuant to the FLSA on behalf of Plaintiffs and the proposed FLSA collective against all Defendants and the proposed Defendant class for failure to pay them minimum wages as employees. Plaintiffs and the members of the proposed FLSA Collective seek unpaid minimum wages, an equal amount as liquidated damages, attorneys' fees, and costs in connection with Count I. Count II asserts claims on behalf of Plaintiffs Johnson and Cooke and the proposed Pennsylvania class against fourteen colleges and universities located in Pennsylvania (the "Pennsylvania-based Defendants" for violating the PMWA by failing to pay them minimum wages for the hours they spent on activities relating to NCAA D1 sports. Plaintiffs Johnson, Cooke, and the proposed Pennsylvania class seek recovery of unpaid wages, attorneys' fees, and costs in connection with Count II. Count III asserts a claim for unjust enrichment on behalf of Plaintiffs Johnson, Cooke, and the proposed Pennsylvania class against the Pennsylvania-based Defendants for benefiting from the unpaid labor of Plaintiffs Johnson, Cooke, and the proposed Pennsylvania class. Plaintiffs Johnson, Cooke, and the proposed Pennsylvania class seek judgment in an amount equal to the benefits unjustly retained by the Pennsylvania-based Defendants in connection with Count III.

Count IV asserts a claim on behalf of Plaintiffs Kerkeles, Labella, Willebeek-Lemair, and the proposed New York class against eighteen schools located in New York (the "New York-based Defendants for failure to pay them minimum wages under the NYLL. Plaintiffs Kerkeles, Labella, Willebeek-Lemair, and the proposed New York class seek recovery of unpaid wages, liquidated damages, attorneys' fees, and costs in connection with Count IV. Count V asserts a claim on behalf of Plaintiffs Kerkeles, Labella, Willebeek-Lemair, and the proposed New York class against the New York-based Defendants for failure to pay them wages for all hours they spent on NCAA D1 sports in violation of the NYLL. Plaintiffs Kerkeles, Labella, Willebeek-Lemair, and the proposed New York class seek the total amount of their unpaid straight-time wages, liquidated damages, attorneys' fees, costs, and interest in connection with Count V. Count VI asserts a claim on behalf of Plaintiffs Kerkeles, Labella, Willebeek-Lemair and the proposed New York class against the New York-based Defendants for unjust enrichment for benefiting from their uncompensated labor. Plaintiffs Kerkeles, Labella, Willebeek-Lemair, and the proposed New York class seek judgment in an amount equal to the benefits unjustly retained by the New York-based Defendants in connection with Count VI.

Count VII asserts a claim on behalf of Plaintiff Ruiz and the members of the proposed Connecticut class against five universities located in Connecticut (the "Connecticut-based Defendants" for violating the CMWA by failing to pay them minimum wages for any and all hours that they allowed Plaintiff Ruiz and the proposed Connecticut class to work. Plaintiff Ruiz and the members of the proposed Connecticut class seek payment of unpaid wages, liquidated damages, attorneys' fees, and costs in connection with Count VII. Count VIII asserts a claim on behalf of Plaintiff Ruiz and the members of the proposed Connecticut class against the Connecticut-based Defendants for unjust enrichment for inducing them to perform work while failing to properly compensate them. Plaintiff Ruiz and the proposed Connecticut class seek judgment in the amount of the benefits unjustly retained by the Connecticut-based Defendants in connection with Count VIII.

The Attended Schools Defendants have moved to dismiss all claims against them pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) on the ground that it does not plausibly allege that Plaintiffs are their employees.

[ *** ]

## III. DISCUSSION

The ASD argue that the Complaint fails to state any claims against them because it does not allege facts that would establish that Plaintiffs are their employees, which is a requirement for bringing a claim under the FLSA. The FLSA defines the term "employee" as "any individual employed by an employer." The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit has explained that "[t]his statutory definition is 'necessarily broad to effectuate the remedial purposes of the Act.'" "In accordance with this 'expansive definition[],' courts must 'look to the economic realities of the relationship in determining employee status under the FLSA.'" The ASD assert three reasons why Plaintiffs cannot be their employees: (1) student athletes such as Plaintiffs are amateurs; (2) the Department of Labor has determined that interscholastic athletes are not employees for purposes of the FLSA; and (3) the Complaint does not plausibly allege that Plaintiffs are employees pursuant to a multi-factor test used to determine whether individuals are employees.

###### A. Amateurism

The ASD maintain that Plaintiffs are not employees of the schools they attend, and for which they compete in interscholastic athletics, because they are amateurs and the Supreme Court has recognized that "[c]ollege athletics in the United States is defined by its century-old 'revered tradition of amateurism.'" The ASD rely both on the Supreme Court's decision in National Collegiate Athletic Association v. Board of Regents and on Berger v. National Collegiate Athletic Association, in which the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit rejected a lawsuit brought pursuant to the FLSA by former student athletes against the NCAA and more than 120 of its D1 member schools. The Berger Court relied on the Supreme Court's recognition of the tradition of amateurism in college sports in Board of Regents to find that this "long-standing tradition defines the economic reality of the relationship between student athletes and their schools." The ASD maintain that the NCAA member schools' history of "'[n]ot paying student-athletes is _precisely what makes them amateurs._'" Thus, the ASD engage in the circular reasoning that they should not be required to pay Plaintiffs a minimum wage under the FLSA because Plaintiffs are amateurs, and that Plaintiffs are amateurs because the ASD and the other NCAA member schools have a long history of not paying student athletes like Plaintiffs.

The Supreme Court did, indeed, note in Board of Regents that "[t]he NCAA plays a critical role in the maintenance of a revered tradition of amateurism in college sports." However, it recently rejected the NCAA's argument that Board of Regents "expressly approved its limits on student-athlete compensation—and [that] this approval forecloses any meaningful review of those limits today." Nat'l Collegiate Athletic Ass'n v. Alston, 141 S. Ct. 2141 (2021). The Supreme Court explained in Alston that:

> Board of Regents may suggest that courts should take care when assessing the NCAA's restraints on student-athlete compensation, sensitive to their procompetitive possibilities. But these remarks do not suggest that courts must reflexively reject _all_ challenges to the NCAA's compensation restrictions. Student-athlete compensation rules were not even at issue in Board of Regents.

As Justice Kavanaugh noted in his concurring opinion in Alston, the argument "that colleges may decline to pay student athletes because the defining feature of college sports ... is that the student athletes are not paid.... is circular and unpersuasive." Accordingly, we reject the ASD's argument that Plaintiffs are not employees entitled to minimum wages pursuant to the FLSA because there is a long-standing tradition of amateurism in NCAA interscholastic athletics that defines the economic reality of the relationship between Plaintiffs and the ASD.[^JohnsonA7]

[ *** ]

###### C. The Economic Reality of the Relationship Between Plaintiffs and the ASD

###### 1. Expectation of compensation

As we mentioned above, we "look to the economic realities of the relationship in determining employee status under the FLSA." The ASD argue that Plaintiffs and other student athletes cannot be employees of the schools they attend because they participate in interscholastic athletics for those schools without any expectation of payment and this amateurism "defines the economic reality of the relationship between student athletes and their schools." The ASD maintain that, while the FLSA's definition of employee is exceedingly broad, it does not include an individual who works for a covered enterprise without any express or implied compensation agreement. The ASD rely on Walling v. Portland Terminal Co., 330 U.S. 148 (1947), in which the Supreme Court noted that the definition of employee in Section 3(g) of the FLSA "was obviously not intended to stamp all persons as employees who, without any express or implied compensation agreement, might work for their own advantage on the premises of another." In Portland Terminal, the Supreme Court determined that individuals who participated in a railroad company's training session for prospective brakemen were not employees of the railroad entitled to minimum and overtime wages under the FLSA, even though they were required to complete the training session before the railroad would hire them. The Court noted that the definitions of employer and employee in the FLSA, while broad, "cannot be interpreted so as to make a person whose work serves only his own interest an employee of another person who gives him aid and instruction." Thus, since the record in Portland Terminal showed "that the railroads receive no 'immediate advantage' from any work done by the trainees," the Supreme Court held that those trainees were not employees within the meaning of the FLSA. In contrast, the Complaint in this action alleges that the ASD receive considerable financial advantage from Plaintiffs' participation in interscholastic athletics. We conclude, accordingly, that Portland Terminal is not controlling here.

The ASD also rely on Tony & Susan Alamo Foundation, in which the Supreme Court determined that some individuals who believed themselves to be volunteers for the Foundation, but who relied on non-wage benefits they received from the Foundation, were employees under the FLSA. The Tony and Susan Alamo Foundation was a nonprofit religious organization that derived its income from commercial businesses staffed by individuals associated with the Foundation, many of whom had been drug addicts before being rehabilitated by the Foundation. The Foundation provided its associates with room and board but did not pay them salaries. The Secretary of Labor filed an action against the Foundation, asserting that the Foundation violated the minimum wage, overtime, and recordkeeping provisions of the FLSA by not paying the associates wages. Some Foundation associates testified at the trial and "vigorously protested the payment of wages, asserting that they considered themselves volunteers who were working only for religious and evangelical reasons." Nonetheless, the Supreme Court affirmed the lower court's determination that the associates were employees even though they considered themselves to be volunteers and did not seek wages under the FLSA. The Supreme Court explained that "the purposes of the Act require that it be applied even to those who would decline its protections. If an exception to the Act were carved out for employees willing to testify that they performed work 'voluntarily,' employers might be able to use superior bargaining power to coerce employees to make such assertions, or to waive their protections under the Act." Consequently, we cannot dismiss Plaintiffs' claims simply because they commenced their careers as student athletes for the ASD without an express or implied compensation agreement, as in this regard, they are like the Tony and Susan Alamo Foundation associates who had no expectation that they would be paid wages and yet were found to be employees.

When we consider whether Plaintiffs are employees of the ASD, we are mindful "that the determination of the relationship does not depend on ... isolated factors but rather upon the circumstances of the whole activity." Thus, "'[w]hen determining whether someone is an employee under the FLSA, economic reality rather than technical concepts is to be the test of employment.'" "'Under this theory, the FLSA defines employer 'expansively,' and with 'striking breadth.' The Supreme Court has even gone so far as to acknowledge that the FLSA's definition of an employer is 'the broadest definition that has ever been included in any one act.'" 

Courts have, accordingly, developed multifactor tests to be used in determining, based on the circumstances of the whole relationship between the parties, whether individuals are employees or independent contractors, whether entities are joint employers, and whether individuals are employees or interns. The ASD ask us to reject the use of any existing multifactor tests because they fail to "account[] for the 'revered tradition of amateurism in college sports.'" As we have rejected the ASD's argument that Plaintiffs cannot be their employees because of the "revered tradition of amateurism in college sports," we also reject their argument that we should not use existing multifactor tests because they fail to account for this "revered tradition."

###### 2. The Glatt multi-factor test

The ASD suggest in the alternative, that, of the three multifactor tests mentioned above, the Glatt test would be the best for analyzing the economic reality of the relationship between student athletes and their schools. In Glatt, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit considered "the broad question of under what circumstances an unpaid intern must be deemed an 'employee' under the FLSA and therefore compensated for his work." The Second Circuit determined that "the proper question is whether the intern or the employer is the primary beneficiary of the relationship." Id. at 536. According to Glatt, the "primary beneficiary test" has three important features: (1) "it focuses on what the intern receives in exchange for his work[;]" (2) "it also accords courts the flexibility to examine the economic reality as it exists between the intern and the employer[;]" and (3) "it acknowledges that the intern-employer relationship should not be analyzed in the same manner as the standard employer-employee relationship because the intern enters into the relationship with the expectation of receiving educational or vocational benefits that are not necessarily expected with all forms of employment." Additionally, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit has commented that "that the primary beneficiary test best captures the Supreme Court's economic realities test in the student/employee context and that it is therefore the most appropriate test for deciding whether students should be regarded as employees under the FLSA." The primary beneficiary test described in Glatt utilizes the following seven factors:

> 1. The extent to which the intern and the employer clearly understand that there is no expectation of compensation. Any promise of compensation, express or implied, suggests that the intern is an employee—and vice versa.

> 2. The extent to which the internship provides training that would be similar to that which would be given in an educational environment, including the clinical and other hands-on training provided by educational institutions.

> 3. The extent to which the internship is tied to the intern's formal education program by integrated coursework or the receipt of academic credit.

> 4. The extent to which the internship accommodates the intern's academic commitments by corresponding to the academic calendar.

> 5. The extent to which the internship's duration is limited to the period in which the internship provides the intern with beneficial learning.

> 6. The extent to which the intern's work complements, rather than displaces, the work of paid employees while providing significant educational benefits to the intern.

> 7. The extent to which the intern and the employer understand that the internship is conducted without entitlement to a paid job at the conclusion of the internship.

"Applying these considerations requires weighing and balancing all of the circumstances. No one factor is dispositive and every factor need not point in the same direction for the court to conclude that the intern is not an employee entitled to the minimum wage." Moreover, these factors "are non-exhaustive—courts may consider relevant evidence beyond the specified factors in appropriate cases." 

The ASD argue that the allegations of the Complaint demonstrate that the Glatt factors either weigh in favor of finding that Plaintiffs are not their employees or are neutral, so that the application of these factors to the facts alleged in the Complaint demonstrate that Plaintiffs are not their employees. The ASD maintain that the factual allegations of the Complaint clearly allege that the first Glatt factor, whether there is an "expectation of compensation" between the Plaintiffs and the ASD, favors a determination that Plaintiffs are not employees of the ASD. Pertinent to this factor, the Complaint alleges that "Student Athletes do not have any options to choose any opportunities to play NCAA sports for wages at any NCAA D1 member school. Student Athletes also do not have any options to bargain for such wages with any such school." It also alleges that all NCAA member schools "have mutually agreed not to offer wages for participation in intercollegiate Varsity sports, and they have adopted bylaws prohibiting schools from offering wages and Student Athletes from accepting wages." Upon consideration of these allegations, we conclude that the facts alleged in the Complaint with respect to the first Glatt factor weigh in favor of finding that Plaintiffs are not the employees of the ASD.

The ASD also contend that the facts alleged in the Complaint demonstrate that the second, third and fifth Glatt factors, "[t]he extent to which the internship provides training that would be similar to that which would be given in an educational environment," "[t]he extent to which the internship is tied to the intern's formal education program," and "[t]he extent to which the internship's duration is limited to the period in which the internship provides the intern with beneficial learning," all weigh in favor of finding that Plaintiffs are not their employees because the Complaint alleges that student athletes derive some educational benefit from participation in NCAA athletics. The ASD specifically rely on the allegation that the NCAA and Villanova University have contended, in connection with a different lawsuit, that "[l]earning benefits from participation in NCAA athletics include, but are not limited to: discipline, work ethic, strategic thinking, time management, leadership, goal-setting, and teamwork."

The Complaint does not contain any factual allegations that specifically pertain to whether student athletes' participation in interscholastic athletics "provides training that would be similar to that which would be given in an educational environment" or whether student athletes' participation in NCAA D1 sports in their respective universities is limited in time to the period in which their participation provides them with "beneficial learning." Accordingly, we conclude that the facts alleged in the Complaint with respect to the second and fifth Glatt factors are neutral with respect to whether Plaintiffs are employees of the ASD. The Complaint alleges, in connection with the third Glatt factor, that "[t]he NCAA and Villanova University admit [in connection with another lawsuit] that NCAA sports are not tied to the student's formal education program by integrated coursework or receipt of academic credit." We conclude, accordingly, that the facts alleged in the Complaint with respect to the third Glatt factor, "the extent to which the position is tied to the intern's formal education program," weigh in favor of a finding that Plaintiffs are employees of the ASD.

The ASD further argue that the Complaint alleges facts that would demonstrate that the fourth Glatt factor, "[t]he extent to which the internship accommodates the intern's academic commitments by corresponding to the academic calendar," weighs in favor of finding that Plaintiffs are not their employees even though there is an "arguably-imperfect correspondence between some athletic seasons and the academic calendar," because the Complaint alleges that the ASD and other NCAA D1 member schools support student athletes in the classroom. The ASD rely on allegations that they track the time that student athletes devote to their sports, that some NCAA D1 conferences have approved proposals to require time management plans for each sport and to prohibit athletically related activities during some time periods, and that Villanova University provides academic support for students. On the other hand, Plaintiffs maintain that the facts alleged in the Complaint demonstrate that this factor weighs in favors of finding that they are employees because the Complaint alleges that they are required to participate in athletically related activities that take in excess of 30 hours per week and interfere with their academic commitments by preventing them from taking classes they wish to take and from majoring in the subjects they wish to major in. We conclude that the Complaint alleges facts that demonstrate that Plaintiffs' participation in NCAA athletic activities for the ASD interferes with their academic pursuits and, thus, that the facts alleged with respect to the fourth Glatt factor weigh in favor of finding that Plaintiffs are employees of the ASD.

The ASD also argue that the facts alleged in the Complaint with respect to the sixth Glatt factor, "[t]he extent to which the intern's work complements, rather than displaces, the work of paid employees while providing significant educational benefits to the intern," weighs in favor of finding that Plaintiffs are not their employees, because student athletes are not alleged to displace the work of any paid employees. Plaintiffs do not contend that their participation in interscholastic athletics displaces any paid employees but maintain that the allegations of the Complaint demonstrate that this factor weighs in favor of finding that they are employees because the Complaint alleges that they gain no educational benefits from being student athletes. The Complaint alleges that the NCAA and Villanova University have admitted that student athletes do not receive any academic credit for participating in NCAA sports and that "NCAA sports are not tied to the student's formal education program by integrated coursework." As we discussed above, the Complaint also alleges that the amount of time that student athletes spend in connection with their participation in NCAA D1 athletics interferes with their ability to take the classes that they want to take and major in the fields they prefer and inhibits their ability to keep up with the classes they do take. We therefore conclude that the Complaint plainly alleges that Plaintiffs' participation in interscholastic athletics for the ASD does not provide them with significant educational benefits and we further conclude, accordingly, that the facts alleged in the Complaint with respect to the sixth Glatt factor weigh in favor of a finding that Plaintiffs are the employees of the ASD, even though they are not alleged to displace other paid employees.

With respect to the seventh Glatt factor, "[t]he extent to which the intern and the employer understand that the internship is conducted without entitlement to a paid job at the conclusion of the internship," the ASD also assert that the facts alleged in the Complaint weigh in favor of a finding that Plaintiffs are not their employees because the Complaint alleges that student athletes are not entitled to paid jobs at their respective NCAA D1 schools after graduation. We agree and conclude that the facts alleged in the Complaint with respect to the seventh Glatt factor weigh in favor of a finding that Plaintiffs are not the employees of the ASD.

In sum, we have found that the facts alleged in the Complaint would, if proven, support conclusions that the first and seventh Glatt factors weigh in favor of finding that the Plaintiffs are not employees of the ASD, that the second and fifth Glatt factors would be neutral, and that the third, fourth, and sixth Glatt factors would weigh in favor of finding that Plaintiffs are employees of the ASD. Balancing all of these factors, and mindful that none of these "factor[s] is dispositive and [that] every factor need not point in the same direction," we conclude that the Complaint plausibly alleges that Plaintiffs are employees of the ASD under the Glatt test.[^JohnsonA11]

##### IV. CONCLUSION

For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the Complaint plausibly alleges that Plaintiffs are employees of the ASD for purposes of the FLSA. Accordingly, we deny the Motion to Dismiss in its entirety. [ ... ]

[^JohnsonA1]: (n.1 in opinion) The NCAA and the other named Defendant universities have also filed a Motion to Dismiss pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6) on the ground that the Complaint does not plausibly allege that they were joint employers of Plaintiffs. That motion will be addressed separately.

[^JohnsonA7]: (n.7 in opinion) The ASD also argue that student athletes who play intercollegiate sports cannot be "employees" under the FLSA because the common usage of the terms "employment" and "work" do not encompass students playing sports. The ASD rely on the following comment in Berger: "[s]imply put, student-athletic 'play' is not 'work.'" However, athletic "play" is "work" when the athletes are paid, which is evident from the number of individuals who are employed to "play" for professional teams competing in football, baseball, basketball, and ice hockey, among other sports. We also note that many students are "employed" to do paid work, such as students who have work-study positions with their respective universities. Accordingly, we reject the ASD's contention that student athletes who play intercollegiate sports cannot be "employees" under the FLSA because the common usage of the terms "employment" and "work" do not encompass students playing sports.

[^JohnsonA11]: (n.11 in opinion) The parties also disagree regarding whether the Complaint plausibly alleges that Plaintiffs are employees of the ASD using the test outlined in DialAmerica. Since we have determined that the Complaint plausibly alleges that Plaintiffs are employees of the ASD for purposes of the FLSA under the Glatt test, we need not address whether the Complaint also alleges that Plaintiffs are employees of the ASD under the DialAmerica test.


# 2. Identifying Employers

### Amarnare v. Merrill, Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith, Inc.

#### 611 F.Supp. 344 (S.D.N.Y. 1984)

##### EDWARD WEINFELD, District Judge.

In this action against the defendant, Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Inc. ("Merrill Lynch"), the plaintiff, Tanyah Amarnare, alleges that Merrill Lynch was her "joint employer" with Mature Temps, Inc. ("Mature Temps"), not named as a defendant, and that Merrill Lynch violated Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 by discharging her from her temporary job because of her sex (female), race (black), and national origin (Afro-American). She worked for Merrill Lynch as an administrative assistant for two weeks, from April 14 to April 30, 1981.

Merrill Lynch moves, pursuant to Fed.R. Civ.P. 12(b)(1), (2), and (6), to dismiss the amended complaint for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted and, pursuant to Rule 8(a)(2), for failure to show that the plaintiff is entitled to relief. The essence of the motion, however variously stated, is that the relationship of employer and employee did not exist between Merrill Lynch and Amarnare; that in fact the plaintiff was employed by Mature Temps, an employment agency that provides temporary personnel to business concerns such as Merrill Lynch; and that Merrill Lynch so engaged her but discharged her after two weeks because her services were unsatisfactory. In sum, Merrill Lynch claims that plaintiff worked for it as an independent contractor and that no direct employment relationship between plaintiff and Merrill Lynch was contemplated by either of them. Accordingly, it is urged that the plaintiff's claim is not covered by Title VII.

In resisting the motion, the plaintiff alleges that, although during the brief period of her service Mature Temps paid her salary, Merrill Lynch controlled her work hours, work place, and work assignments; hired, trained, and supervised her; and ultimately discharged her. She also alleges that no white male or white female was terminated in the manner she was terminated. [ ... ]

[ *** ]

Title VII forbids an "employer" to engage in an "unlawful employment practice." An "employer" is a person engaged in commerce who has employed fifteen or more persons during a specified period. Merrill Lynch does not deny that it qualifies as an employer under this definition. As such, Merrill Lynch is forbidden by Title VII "to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, _or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment,_ because of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin." By its terms, this prohibition is not limited to employers who discriminate against their own employees. Indeed, it is significant that in providing a private right of action against a statutory employer Title VII does not refer to "employee" but to "the person aggrieved," a term that has been construed "as comprehending individuals who do not stand in a direct employment relationship with an employer." Amarnare alleges that Merrill Lynch and Mature Temps were her joint employers. This conclusion, if warranted, is sufficient to bring her action within the ambit of Title VII, though it is not necessary to do so. Even if Amarnare were an employee only of Mature Temps, she may invoke the statute on the ground that Merrill Lynch interfered with her employment opportunities with Mature Temps. The defendant's motion to dismiss must be considered on both grounds.

First, whether the plaintiff was an employee of Merrill Lynch for purposes of Title VII is a question of federal law. The Court is required to analyze the "economic realities" of the situation "viewed in light of the common law principles of agency and the right of the employer to control the employee." The "extent of the employer's right to control the 'means and manner' of the worker's performance is the most important factor." Based on the allegations in the amended complaint and the supporting affidavits, there is no doubt that Merrill Lynch exercised complete control over Amarnare's work assignments, the means and manner of her performance, and the hours of her employment. There is no suggestion but that Amarnare was subject to the direct supervision of Merrill Lynch employees in all respects and at all times during the two-week period in which she worked for the company. It is also clear from the defendant's affidavits that Merrill Lynch had the right to discharge Amarnare and to request a replacement from Mature Temps if it found Amarnare's services unsatisfactory.

When an employer has the right to control the means and manner of an individual's performance, as Merrill Lynch allegedly had with regard to Amarnare, an employer-employee relationship is likely to exist. Factors other than control are then of marginal importance. In this case, the only other factor Amarnare alleges is that she was paid directly by Mature Temps rather than Merrill Lynch. This factor by itself is an insufficient basis on which to characterize plaintiff as an independent contractor. None of the Title VII cases, including those cited by the defendant, supports such a characterization. In most of those cases in which the plaintiffs were held to be independent contractors, the courts emphasized that the defendants exercised no control over the means and manner of the plaintiffs' performances. The courts also emphasized the presence of one or more factors such as that the plaintiff owned his own equipment, paid his own operating expenses, hired his own employees to do the work in question, had entered into a contract that described him as an independent contractor, or reported his earnings for income tax purposes as "self-employment income." There is no allegation that any of these factors were present in Amarnare's case.

That plaintiff was paid directly by Mature Temps is not conclusive that she was solely its employee. That she was subject to the direction of Merrill Lynch in her work assignments, hours of service, and other usual aspects of an employee-employer relationship permits an inference that she was an employee of both Mature Temps and Merrill Lynch during the two-week period in question. Her status differs from that of most other Title VII plaintiffs in that her services were obtained through a temporary employment agency. At common law, the status of a person employed under such circumstances would be determined under the loaned servant doctrine, which provides that "an employee directed or permitted to perform services for another 'special' employer may become that employer's employee while performing those services." Federal courts have applied this common law rule in other contexts and held that a person whose salary is paid by one entity while his services are engaged on a temporary basis by another is an employee of both entities. The key factor in these loaned servant cases was the "special" employer's exclusive right to supervise the employee's work during the period of temporary service. These cases lend further support to the plaintiff's allegation that she was an employee of both Merrill Lynch and Mature Temps for purposes of Title VII.

Next, the plaintiff may also invoke Title VII on the alternative ground that Merrill Lynch allegedly interfered with her employment opportunities with Mature Temps. Several federal courts have held that Title VII permits suits against statutory employers "who are neither actual nor potential direct employers of particular complainants, but who control access to such employment and who deny such access by reference to invidious criteria." Merrill Lynch allegedly has blocked plaintiff's access to temporary employment through Mature Temps, and the Ninth Circuit has held that Title VII applies in this situation. In _Gomez v. Alexian Brothers Hospital,_ the plaintiff practiced medicine under a professional corporation that proposed to the defendant hospital to operate its emergency room. Under the proposed contract, the plaintiff would serve as the director of the emergency room, although he would remain an employee of the professional corporation. After the hospital rejected the proposed contract on allegedly discriminatory grounds, the plaintiff was permitted to sue the hospital under Title VII for denying him the "opportunity to be employed by [the professional corporation] as director of defendants' emergency room." The court reasoned:

> The fact that plaintiff continues as an employee of [the professional corporation] does not mean the employment relationship between [the professional corporation] and plaintiff has not been interfered with. The conditions of plaintiff's employment are different than they would have been had he not been discriminated against.

The same reasoning applies in Amarnare's case. Even if she remains an employee of Mature Temps and continues to receive temporary assignments at other companies, she asserts a claim for loss of opportunity to work for Mature Temps as an administrative assistant at Merrill Lynch.

Merrill Lynch also argues that plaintiff has failed to allege facts sufficient to support a claim of unlawful discrimination. This argument has no merit. Amarnare has alleged that her work at Merrill Lynch was praised by two of her supervisors; that one of these supervisors later discharged her on the ground that her work was unsatisfactory; and that no other white employee, male or female, had been discharged by Merrill Lynch in the manner that she was discharged. Although these allegations do not state a claim of sex discrimination, in view of Amarnare's assertion that no white women were treated as she was, they do state a _prima facie_ case of race discrimination under Title VII. The elements of a _prima facie_ case are (1) the plaintiff is a member of a racial minority; (2) she was qualified for the job she held; (3) she was discharged despite her qualifications; and (4) after her discharge, her position remained open and the employer sought someone with comparable qualifications to fill it. Amarnare's race and her discharge are not in dispute, and she has raised a question of fact concerning her qualifications for the job of administrative assistant. Although she has alleged no facts concerning the fourth element, it cannot be said that she could not prove such facts at trial and she may not be denied the opportunity to do so by a motion to dismiss.

[ *** ]

### Johnson v. NCAA

##### 556 F.Supp.3d 491 (E.D. Pa. 2021)


### Joint Employer Status Under the National Labor Relations Act

#### 85 FR 11184 (Feb. 26, 2020)

##### Summary 

The National Labor Relations Board has decided to issue this final rule for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the National Labor Relations Act by establishing the standard for determining whether two employers, as defined in Section 2(2) of the Act, are a joint employer under the NLRA. The Board believes that this rulemaking will foster predictability and consistency regarding determinations of joint-employer status in a variety of business relationships, thereby enhancing labor-management stability, the promotion of which is one of the principal purposes of the Act. Under this final rule, an entity may be considered a joint employer of a separate employer's employees only if the two share or codetermine the employees' essential terms and conditions of employment, which are exclusively defined as wages, benefits, hours of work, hiring, discharge, discipline, supervision, and direction.

##### Final Rule 

Joint Employers.

(a\) An employer, as defined by Section 2(2) of the National Labor Relations Act (the Act), may be considered a joint employer of a separate employer's employees only if the two employers share or codetermine the employees' essential terms and conditions of employment. To establish that an entity shares or codetermines the essential terms and conditions of another employer's employees, the entity must possess and exercise such substantial direct and immediate control over one or more essential terms or conditions of their employment as would warrant finding that the entity meaningfully affects matters relating to the employment relationship with those employees. Evidence of the entity's indirect control over essential terms and conditions of employment of another employer's employees, the entity's contractually reserved but never exercised authority over the essential terms and conditions of employment of another employer's employees, or the entity's control over mandatory subjects of bargaining other than the essential terms and conditions of employment is probative of joint-employer status, but only to the extent it supplements and reinforces evidence of the entity's possession or exercise of direct and immediate control over a particular essential term and condition of employment. Joint-employer status must be determined on the totality of the relevant facts in each particular employment setting. The party asserting that an entity is a joint employer has the burden of proof.

(b\) “Essential terms and conditions of employment” means wages, benefits, hours of work, hiring, discharge, discipline, supervision, and direction.

(c\) “Direct and Immediate Control” means the following with respect to each respective essential employment term or condition:

	(1) Wages. An entity exercises direct and immediate control over wages if it actually determines the wage rates, salary or other rate of pay that is paid to another employer's individual employees or job classifications. An entity does not exercise direct and immediate control over wages by entering into a cost-plus contract (with or without a maximum reimbursable wage rate).

	(2) Benefits. An entity exercises direct and immediate control over benefits if it actually determines the fringe benefits to be provided or offered to another employer's employees. This would include selecting the benefit plans (such as health insurance plans and pension plans) and/or level of benefits provided to another employer's employees. An entity does not exercise direct and immediate control over benefits by permitting another employer, under an arm's-length contract, to participate in its benefit plans.

	(3) Hours of work. An entity exercises direct and immediate control over hours of work if it actually determines work schedules or the work hours, including overtime, of another employer's employees. An entity does not exercise direct and immediate control over hours of work by establishing an enterprise's operating hours or when it needs the services provided by another employer.

	(4) Hiring. An entity exercises direct and immediate control over hiring if it actually determines which particular employees will be hired and which employees will not. An entity does not exercise direct and immediate control over hiring by requesting changes in staffing levels to accomplish tasks or by setting minimal hiring standards such as those required by government regulation.

	(5) Discharge. An entity exercises direct and immediate control over discharge if it actually decides to terminate the employment of another employer's employee. An entity does not exercise direct and immediate control over discharge by bringing misconduct or poor performance to the attention of another employer that makes the actual discharge decision, by expressing a negative opinion of another employer's employee, by refusing to allow another employer's employee to continue performing work under a contract, or by setting minimal standards of performance or conduct, such as those required by government regulation.

	(6) Discipline. An entity exercises direct and immediate control over discipline if it actually decides to suspend or otherwise discipline another employer's employee. An entity does not exercise direct and immediate control over discipline by bringing misconduct or poor performance to the attention of another employer that makes the actual disciplinary decision, by expressing a negative opinion of another employer's employee, or by refusing to allow another employer's employee to access its premises or perform work under a contract.

	(7) Supervision. An entity exercises direct and immediate control over supervision by actually instructing another employer's employees how to perform their work or by actually issuing employee performance appraisals. An entity does not exercise direct and immediate control over supervision when its instructions are limited and routine and consist primarily of telling another employer's employees what work to perform, or where and when to perform the work, but not how to perform it.

	(8) Direction. An entity exercises direct and immediate control over direction by assigning particular employees their individual work schedules, positions, and tasks. An entity does not exercise direct and immediate control over direction by setting schedules for completion of a project or by describing the work to be accomplished on a project.

(d\) “Substantial direct and immediate control” means direct and immediate control that has a regular or continuous consequential effect on an essential term or condition of employment of another employer's employees. Such control is not “substantial” if only exercised on a sporadic, isolated, or de minimis basis.

(e\) “Indirect control” means indirect control over essential terms and conditions of employment of another employer's employees but not control or influence over setting the objectives, basic ground rules, or expectations for another entity's performance under a contract.

(f\) “Contractually reserved authority over essential terms and conditions of employment” means the authority that an entity reserves to itself, under the terms of a contract with another employer, over the essential terms and conditions of employment of that other employer's employees, but that has never been exercised.


### Standard for Determining Joint-Employer Status

#### 87 FR 54641 (Sept. 7, 2022)

##### Summary

This notice of proposed rulemaking proposes to rescind and replace the final rule entitled “Joint Employer Status Under the National Labor Relations Act,” which was published on February 26, 2020 and took effect on April 27, 2020. The proposed rule would revise the standard for determining whether two employers, as defined in section 2(2) of the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA or Act), are joint employers of particular employees within the meaning of section 2(3) of the Act. The proposed changes are designed to explicitly ground the joint-employer standard in established common-law agency principles and provide relevant guidance to parties covered by the Act regarding their rights and responsibilities when more than one statutory employer possesses the authority to control or exercises the power to control particular employees' essential terms and conditions of employment.

##### The Proposed Rule

Joint Employers.

(a\) An employer, as defined by section 2(2) of the National Labor Relations Act (the Act), is an employer of particular employees, as defined by section 2(3) of the Act, if the employer has an employment relationship with those employees under common-law agency principles.

(b\) For all purposes under the Act, two or more employers of the same particular employees are joint employers of those employees if the employers share or codetermine those matters governing employees' essential terms and conditions of employment.

(c\) To “share or codetermine those matters governing employees' essential terms and conditions of employment” means for an employer to possess the authority to control (whether directly, indirectly, or both), or to exercise the power to control (whether directly, indirectly, or both), one or more of the employees' essential terms and conditions of employment.

(d\) “Essential terms and conditions of employment” will generally include, but are not limited to: wages, benefits, and other compensation; hours of work and scheduling; hiring and discharge; discipline; workplace health and safety; supervision; assignment; and work rules and directions governing the manner, means, or methods of work performance.

(e\) Whether an employer possesses the authority to control or exercises the power to control one or more of the employees' terms and conditions of employment is determined under common-law agency principles. Possessing the authority to control is sufficient to establish status as a joint employer, regardless of whether control is exercised. Exercising the power to control indirectly is sufficient to establish status as a joint employer, regardless of whether the power is exercised directly. Control exercised through an intermediary person or entity is sufficient to establish status as a joint employer.

(f\) Evidence of an employer's control over matters that are immaterial to the existence of an employment relationship under common-law agency principles or control over matters that do not bear on the employees' essential terms and conditions of employment is not relevant to the determination of whether the employer is a joint employer.

(g\) A party asserting that an employer is a joint employer of particular employees has the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the entity meets the requirements set forth in paragraphs (a) through (f) of this section.

(h\) The provisions of this section are intended to be severable. If any paragraph of this section is held to be unlawful, the remaining paragraphs of this section not deemed unlawful shall remain in effect to the fullest extent permitted by law.



# 3. Recruitment & Hiring 

## 3.1 Employment Applications 

### Starbucks v. Superior Court 


## 3.2 Negligent Hiring  

### Malorney v. B&L Motor Freight, Inc. 

## 3.3 Employment References 


### Kadlec Medical Center v. Lakeview Anesthesia Associates 


### DEFAMATION CASE 


### Immunity from civil liability for employers disclosing information

#### N.C.G.S. § 1-539.12

(a\) An employer who discloses information about a current or former employee's jobhistory or job performance to a prospective employer of the current or former employee uponrequest of the prospective employer or upon request of the current or former employee isimmune from civil liability and is not liable in civil damages for the disclosure or anyconsequences of the disclosure. This immunity shall not apply when a claimant shows by apreponderance of the evidence both of the following:

	(1) The information disclosed by the current or former employer was false.

	(2) The employer providing the information knew or reasonably should have known that the information was false.

(b\) For purposes of this section, "job performance" includes:

	(1) The suitability of the employee for re-employment;

	(2) The employee's skills, abilities, and traits as they may relate to suitability forfuture employment; and

	(3) In the case of a former employee, the reason for the employee's separation.

(c\) The provisions of this section apply to any employee, agent, or other representative ofthe current or former employer who is authorized to provide and who provides information inaccordance with the provisions of this section. For the purposes of this section, "employer" alsoincludes a job placement service but does not include a private personnel service as defined inG.S. 95-47.1 or a job listing service as defined in G.S. 95-47.19 except as provided hereinafter.The provisions of this section apply to a private personnel service as defined in G.S, 95-47.1 anda job listing service as defined in G.S. 95-47.19 only to the extent that the service conveysinformation derived from credit reports, court records, educational records, and informationfurnished to it by the employee or prior employers and the service identifies the source of theinformation.

(d\) This section does not affect any privileges or immunities from civil liabilityestablished by another section of the General Statutes or available at common law.

### Blacklisting employees

#### N.C.G.S. § 14-355

If any person, agent, company or corporation, after having discharged any employee from his or its service, shall prevent or attempt to prevent, by word or writing of any kind, such discharged employee from obtaining employment with any other person, company or corporation, such person, agent or corporation shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00); and such person, agent, company or corporation shall be liable in penal damages to such discharged person, to be recovered by civil action. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting any person or agent of any company or corporation from furnishing in writing, upon request, any other person, company or corporation to whom such discharged person or employee has applied for employment, a truthful statement of the reason for such discharge.
