### Desai v. Charter Communications, LLC

#### 381 F.Supp.3d 774 (W.D. Ky. 2019)

##### David J. Hale, Judge.

Plaintiffs [ ... ] alleged that their former employer, Charter Communications, LLC, falsely accused them of theft after their employment was terminated. Following a weeklong trial, a jury agreed, finding Charter liable for defamation per se. Charter has moved for judgment as a matter of law or a new trial. In the alternative, it seeks reduction of the damage award. For the reasons explained below, the Court will reduce the punitive damages and deny Charter's motion in all other respects.

##### I. BACKGROUND

The Court previously summarized the facts of this case as follows:

> Plaintiffs worked at Charter's call center in Louisville, Kentucky, in various capacities. Each was given a Hewlett-Packard (HP) computer printer by Linda Showalter, an administrative assistant at Charter. Plaintiffs maintain that they believed Showalter's distribution of printers was authorized by management. Charter, however, considered Plaintiffs' acceptance of the printers to be a violation of its policy against removing company property without authorization, and it terminated most of the employees involved.

> Approximately one month after Plaintiffs were fired, Charter Human Resources Manager Rodger Simms gave a PowerPoint presentation during a Charter leadership conference. On a slide with the heading "Leadership and Judgment," Simms referred to "'Operation...' Green-light, Buzz-kill, Printer-gate." He encouraged employees to "[a]ct with Integrity and Character." The notes for Simms's oral presentation accompanying the slide state: "Let's get the elephant in the room out in the open, how many of you have heard of ... Operation codes for things that weren't right! All examples of poor judgment. Not bad people, people we know and love but they made the wrong choices." Simms emphasized the importance of "integrity," "character," and having "the courage to do the right thing." He also warned that "[k]nowing something isn't right and allowing it to continue is the same as you doing it!" "Green-light" referred to an incident in which a Charter employee used a company credit card for personal benefit and was terminated as a result. "Buzz-kill" involved the sale of illegal drugs on Charter property by Charter employees; those employees were also terminated.

> Plaintiffs sued Charter for defamation on the ground that "Charter made false statements alleging misconduct on the part of the Plaintiffs relating to the ... distribution of Hewlett-Packard ink jet printers, including but not limited to the [PowerPoint] presentation." They contend that the use of the term "Printer-gate," particularly in conjunction with references to employee theft and drug-dealing, implied that their actions were criminal.

The case was tried solely on a theory of defamation per se. At the close of Plaintiffs' case, Charter moved for judgment as a matter of law, arguing that "Printer-gate" could not constitute defamation per se because it had no "objectively understood definition" and was not defamatory on its face; that Plaintiffs had no proof of damages to support a claim of defamation per quod; and that any inference arising from "Printer-gate" was true because the term referred to "an incident involving the unauthorized removal of company printers from Charter's premises." The Court denied that motion and later granted Plaintiffs' motion for judgment as a matter of law on Charter's truth defense, concluding that there was insufficient evidence from which a reasonable jury could find that Plaintiffs' actions constituted criminal theft. The jury ultimately found Charter liable, awarding each plaintiff $350,000 in compensatory damages and $1 million in punitive damages. The Court entered judgment for Plaintiffs in accordance with the jury's verdict (D.N. 179), and Charter timely sought relief under Rules 50 and 59 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

##### II. ANALYSIS

Charter renews its Rule 50 motion for judgment as a matter of law on the issue of whether the term "Printer-gate" can constitute defamation per se. It further argues that it is entitled to a new trial on the grounds that it should have been allowed to present the defenses of truth and qualified privilege; that James Eversole's testimony was admitted in error; and that the jury was required to find malice by clear and convincing evidence in order to award punitive damages. 

[ *** ]

###### A. Defamation Per Se

As it has on numerous prior occasions, Charter argues that the term "Printer-gate" cannot constitute defamation per se. Charter first asserts that there was no evidence to support a finding that Simms's presentation imputed criminal conduct to Plaintiffs. It further contends that the Court, not the jury, should have determined whether defamation per se occurred. Neither argument is persuasive.

###### 1. Sufficiency of the Evidence

According to Charter, "on the evidence presented at trial, no reasonable jury could have concluded that the use of the term 'Printer-gate' suggested that the Plaintiffs had engaged in theft." But that was not the issue before the jury; the Court had already found, as a matter of law, that the term was "capable of bearing a defamatory meaning." The jury was tasked with deciding whether the "Printer-gate" reference "was reasonably understood by persons who heard it as accusing the plaintiffs of criminal theft."

Charter observes that "multiple witnesses who attended the presentation testified that they did not understand the term to suggest anything criminal at all." It cites the testimony of current Charter employees Mike Barnard, Sandi Streicher, and Theo Carney defining "Printer-gate" as they understood it. Charter acknowledges, however, that two witnesses who attended the meeting—Samantha Little and James Eversole—testified that they understood the term to imply that Plaintiffs had stolen from the company. Contrary to Charter's representation, Little did not merely "testif[y] vaguely that the term 'insinuates that some type of illegal activity had been performed'"; she also testified that she interpreted it as referring to theft. And Eversole, in addition to his statement that the presentation "kind of compar[ed] [Plaintiffs] to gambling and murder", stated that

> the message that was given during the summit didn't really filter into the conversations that were afterward. Those particular conversations were like, oh, well, _that was the time that we fired a bunch of people because they stole equipment._ Like don't do it, like don't take anything from the company.

Thus, both Little and Eversole provided testimony supporting the jury's verdict.

Charter next asserts that Little's testimony cannot support the verdict because "the vague inference of illegal activity that Little drew from the presentation depended entirely on coupling "Printer-gate" with the two other incidents mentioned in the same presentation (Green-light and Buzz-kill) _and_ upon knowledge of what those incidents involved." According to Charter, "Kentucky courts long ago decided that merely mentioning an incident involving the plaintiff in the same context as incidents involving illegal conduct cannot be treated as implying that [the] plaintiff engaged in some illegality." The single case it cites in support of this contention, _Boyd v. Hutton,_ 196 Ky. 512 (1922), made no such proclamation and involved starkly different facts.

In _Boyd,_ the plaintiff alleged that he was defamed by a 1920 newspaper report, clearly offensive by today's standards, that read: "Last Thursday night there were lots of fireworks in Harrodsburg. Jim Boyd, colored, claimed that someone shot him through an open window while he was reading, or lacing his shoes. The shots covered nearly all of his entire body." The report appeared under the same headline—"Shootings in Town"—as reports that another person had "shot at a chicken thief the same night" and a third person "shot at a prowler on his premises." Boyd argued that "the reporting of the three news items in one article was intended to connect him with one of the other two shootings, and did in fact impute to him conduct of a disgraceful or degrading nature." In a four-paragraph opinion affirming the directed verdict in favor of the defendant, the court found Boyd's "construction of the article ... to be wholly fanciful, for it certainly is not warranted by any fair interpretation of the publication itself." 

The Court finds Charter's reliance on _Boyd_ curious in light of the case's historical context; given this context, and the opinion's limited analysis, it has little precedential value. In any event, the facts are clearly distinguishable from those at issue here. Simms's presentation explicitly linked "Printer-gate" to the drug and embezzlement incidents, describing them as "[a]ll examples of poor judgment" in which the individuals involved "made the wrong choices." Moreover, as discussed above, there was testimony that some Charter employees who attended the presentation construed the "Printer-gate" reference as imputing criminal conduct to Plaintiffs; in _Boyd,_ there was apparently no testimony beyond the plaintiff's own. In short, _Boyd_ does not preclude consideration of the context in which the "Printergate" reference was made—indeed, even Charter has acknowledged that allegedly defamatory words "_must_ be evaluated in context." 

Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiffs and drawing all reasonable inferences in their favor, the Court concludes that there was sufficient evidence to support the jury's verdict.

###### 2. Definition of Defamation Per Se

Charter's overarching argument is that the "Printer-gate" reference in Simms's presentation cannot constitute defamation per se because it requires consideration of extrinsic circumstances. The definition of defamation per se has been a point of contention throughout this case, despite the Kentucky Supreme Court and Court of Appeals' numerous declarations that a statement falsely imputing crime—particularly theft—constitutes defamation per se. 

Notwithstanding this extensive precedent, Charter insists that "Printer-gate" cannot be defamation per se because it is not defamatory on its face. Quoting [_Stringer v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc_., 151 S.W.3d 781 (Ky. 2004)], Charter repeatedly asserts that "'if a comprehension of the defamatory nature of the written or spoken words requires extrinsic evidence of context or circumstances,' then the statement can solely be 'libelous or slanderous per quod' and 'special damages, _i.e.,_ actual injury to reputation, must be affirmatively proved.'"  By taking this passage out of context, however, Charter misses its point:

> In comparison to slanderous per se oral statements, which must contain defamatory language of a specific nature, the common law treats a broader class of written defamatory statements as actionable per se: "while spoken words are slanderous per se only if they impute crime, infectious disease, or unfitness to perform duties of office, or tend to disinherit him, written or printed publications, which are false and tend to injure one in his reputation or to expose him to public hatred, contempt, scorn, obloquy, or shame, are libelous per se." All other defamatory statements are merely libelous or slanderous per quod, and special damages, i.e., actual injury to reputation, must be affirmatively proved if a comprehension of the defamatory nature of the written or spoken words requires extrinsic evidence of context or circumstances. We need not belabor this discussion further, however, because a "false accusation of theft is actionable per se—that is, libelous or slanderous per se." Accordingly, Appellants were not required to provide affirmative proof of injury to their reputations in order to recover for the defamatory statements at issue in this case[.]

_Stringer,_ 151 S.W.3d at 794-95.

In other words, certain types of statements—including false accusations of theft—are presumed to have damaged the plaintiffs' reputations, and thus no proof of injury resulting from such statements is required: they are "actionable per se." "All _other_ defamatory statements are merely libelous or slanderous per quod"; these require "affirmative proof of injury to [the plaintiffs'] reputations." Charter's contention that the per se/per quod determination turns on whether extrinsic proof is needed to interpret the statement as defamatory is thus misguided; it is instead "the proof necessary to demonstrate an injury to reputation" that "varies depending upon the characterization of the defamatory language" as defamation per se or per quod.

[ *** ]

Like the instant case, _Stringer_ involved terminated employees who alleged that they were later falsely painted as thieves by their former employer. One of the statements at issue was that "there was more to [the plaintiffs' firing] than" eating candy from open bags (known as "claims candy"). The _Stringer_ court concluded that this statement alone was enough to support the jury's finding of defamation per se.

Clearly, the words "there was more to it than that" are not, on their face, defamatory. Nor was the statement an obvious reference to theft even if placed in context: an assistant manager, "when asked whether [the plaintiffs] had been terminated for eating candy from the claims area, responded [that] "'there was more to it than that" and that he couldn't talk about it.'" Indeed, as in this case, the context (with its reference to "claims candy" or "candy from the claims area") likely would not have been understood by a non-employee. Yet because another employee testified that she interpreted the statement "as an assertion that [the plaintiffs] had stolen items in addition to claims candy," it was sufficient to support a verdict in favor of the plaintiffs. Charter's contention that the jury could not properly consider the context in which "Printer-gate" was discussed is therefore unavailing.

At bottom, the dispute over the characterization of "Printer-gate" is whether it is _actionable_ per se or per quod—i.e., whether Plaintiffs should have been required to prove damages. As explained in _Stringer,_ no proof of damages is required where the statement amounts to an accusation of theft, whether direct or indirect. Charter is thus not entitled to judgment as a matter of law on this ground.

[ *** ]

###### B. Truth Defense

Charter seeks a new trial on the ground that the Court "erred by granting judgment foreclosing the defense of truth." It contends that this "defense should have gone to the jury as long as there was evidence in the record—from any source—sufficient to permit a reasonable jury to conclude that Plaintiffs' actions met the definition of theft." The two cases it cites in support of this contention state no such rule. Charter next cites [the Kentucky model jury] instruction for theft by unlawful taking, asserting that "proving the defense of truth simply required evidence from which a jury could conclude" that the three statutory elements of theft were met. Those elements, as set out in the criminal pattern instruction, are (1) that Plaintiffs took property that belonged to Charter; (2) that in so doing, they knew the property was not their own and were not acting under a claim of right to it; and (3) that in taking the property, Plaintiffs intended to deprive Charter of it.

The Court notes that Charter objected at trial to application of the statutory definition of theft (which formed part of the [ ... ] model instruction on defamation per se), and its counsel admitted that no witness had referred to Plaintiffs' conduct as criminal. In fact, Charter's company representative, Mike Barnard, testified unequivocally that Plaintiffs "did not have the intent to steal" and did not steal from Charter. Each of the plaintiffs testified that there was nothing surreptitious about their taking of the printers; some testified that they didn't even need or want the printers but accepted them at Showalter's repeated urging. All testified that they believed Showalter's distribution of the printers was authorized by management. 

Charter nevertheless argues that "there was ... ample evidence from which the jury could have concluded that the Plaintiffs knew that they did not have legitimate permission to take company property, and that they did so anyway." In support, it first points to various Charter policies and Plaintiffs' acknowledgment that they failed to independently seek authorization from a manager before accepting the printers. According to Charter, "Plaintiffs' decisions _not_ to follow known procedures provides evidence that Plaintiffs knew they did not have authorization to take company property and it could give rise to a reasonable inference that Plaintiffs did not ask for authorization because they knew they would not like the answer they would get." Such an inference is not reasonable, however, in light of the overwhelming evidence—including from Charter's own representative—that Plaintiffs lacked criminal intent.

Charter next asserts that Showalter lacked either actual or apparent authority to distribute the printers because "[n]one of the Plaintiffs testified that a manager at Charter suggested to them that Ms. Showalter had authority to give away the printers." Whether the evidence establishes apparent authority as a matter of Kentucky agency law is of little relevance, however. It is now undisputed that Showalter was not authorized to distribute the printers. The fact that she may have lacked legal authority says nothing about Plaintiffs' state of mind, i.e., whether Plaintiffs "knew the [printers] w[ere] not their own" and thus intended to steal them. Meanwhile, Plaintiffs' testimony that they believed Showalter was authorized to give them the printers fits neatly into Kentucky's "claim of right" defense to theft, which applies if the defendant "had the permission, or believed he had the permission, of [the victim] or some other person authorized to give permission to take the property.

Charter's final assertion, that "there was evidence that Plaintiffs knew their conduct was improper, because they _lied_ about how they got the printers to make their actions appear legitimate," likewise barely warrants discussion. As evidence of Plaintiffs' purported dishonesty, Charter cites an exhibit attached to each plaintiff's interrogatory answers that characterized the printers as having been "apparently passed out as part of an incentive program with the knowledge of management." Plaintiffs did not, as Charter implies, admit to "fabricati[ng]" that statement; rather, they merely acknowledged that they did not receive the printers through an incentive program. A generic exhibit attached to discovery responses, drafted by counsel as part of litigation and with the qualifier "apparently," hardly constitutes the sort of "evidence that one has attempted to cover up a crime" that would serve as "circumstantial proof of one's consciousness of guilt." Charter further misrepresents the record when it claims, citing the testimony of Kruti Desai and Gale Parkerson, that "Plaintiffs admitted that management had not actually been informed of the printer-distribution scheme": Desai acknowledged that she _now_ knows that managers were not aware that she had taken printers, while Gale Parkerson agreed that Charter ultimately determined that Showalter lacked authority to distribute the printers.

In sum, there was insufficient evidence for the jury to reasonably find that Plaintiffs intended to steal the printers, and the Court thus did not err in granting judgment as a matter of law on the issue of truth. Charter is not entitled to a new trial on this ground.

###### C. Qualified Privilege

Charter next argues that it should have been permitted to assert the defense of qualified privilege. Charter sought leave to amend its answer to assert qualified privilege after the deadline for amendment of pleadings had passed. Magistrate Judge Dave Whalin denied the motion, and the Court overruled Charter's objection to that ruling. In its post-trial motion, Charter argues for the first time that amendment was not required, and it again challenges the denial of its request to amend. 

[The court held that "Charter waived the defense of qualified privilege by failing to assert it in a responsive pleading" and that the magistrate judge properly denied Charter's motion for leave to amend its answer to assert that defense.] 

The Court recognizes that availability of the qualified-privilege defense could have drastically altered the outcome of this case. An inexplicable oversight or strategic error on Charter's part, however, does not justify altering the litigation schedule or depriving Plaintiffs of necessary discovery in disregard of Sixth Circuit law and the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Given Charter's failure to assert qualified privilege in its answer, a timely amended answer, or a motion to dismiss, it is reasonable to conclude that omission of the defense earlier in the case was intentional. Yet Charter now essentially asks the Court to allow it the benefit of hindsight—to benefit both from asserting the defense, and from not asserting it. Charter is not entitled to a new trial on this ground.

[ *** ]
