### Ries v. McDonald's USA, LLC

#### No. 1:20-cv-2 (W.D. Mich. Dec. 6, 2021)

##### HALA Y. JARBOU, District Judge.

Plaintiffs [ ... ] bring this action against Defendants for sexual harassment in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and Michigan's Elliot-Larsen Civil Rights Act (ELCRA). Plaintiffs sue McDonald's, LLC and McDonald's Corporation (collectively, "McDonald's") as well as two entities operating a McDonald's franchise in Michigan: MLMLM Corporation and M.A.A.K.S., Inc. (collectively, "Franchisee"). Plaintiffs are former employees of a McDonald's restaurant in Mason, Michigan, operated by Franchisee. They allege that a manager at that location repeatedly harassed them, both physically and verbally. Before the Court is a motion for summary judgment by McDonald's Because no reasonable juror could find that McDonald's acted as an employer or agent subject to liability under Title VII or the ELCRA, the Court will grant the motion.

[ *** ]

##### II. ANALYSIS

###### A. Title VII

Title VII prohibits an "employer" from engaging in certain "unlawful employment practices." The term "employer" means "a person engaged in an industry affecting commerce who has fifteen or more employees ... and any agent of such a person[.]"

McDonald's argues that it is not liable because it did not employ Plaintiffs or control employment matters at the restaurant where Plaintiffs worked. McDonald's argues that it is simply a franchisor; Franchisee controlled the conditions of Plaintiffs' employment, not McDonald's. Plaintiffs respond that McDonald's is liable for two reasons: (1) it retained sufficient control over their employment conditions to qualify as a "joint employer"; and (2) McDonald's caused Plaintiffs to believe that Franchisee was an agent of McDonald's.

###### 1. Joint Employer

"Under the 'joint-employer' theory, 'an entity that is not the plaintiff's formal employer may be treated under these doctrines as if it were the employer for purposes of employment laws such as Title VII.'" "Entities are joint employers if they 'share or co-determine those matters governing essential terms and conditions of employment.'" 

In determining whether an entity is the plaintiff's joint employer, "the major factors include the 'entity's ability to hire, fire or discipline employees, affect their compensation and benefits, and direct and supervise their performance.'" Put simply, McDonald's can be liable as a joint employer if it has "retained for itself sufficient control of the terms and conditions of employment of the employees who are employed by [Franchisee]." 

Here, a franchise agreement between McDonald's and Michael Dickerson (the owner of MLMLM and M.A.A.K.S.) governed the relationship between McDonald's and Franchisee. The agreement, which had a 20-year term, expressly states that "Franchisee shall have no authority, express or implied to act as an agent of McDonald's" and that "Franchisee and McDonald's are not and do not intend to be partners, associates, or joint employers in any way[.]"

More importantly, the agreement did not give McDonald's the ability to hire, fire, discipline, or affect the compensation or benefits of Franchisee's employees. Dickerson testified that he and Nanette Bitner, his operations manager and the senior supervisor of the Mason restaurant, had authority to hire and fire employees. No one from McDonald's played a role in hiring, firing, promoting, disciplining, or setting wages for employees at his restaurants. Nor did they play a role in assigning individual employees to their positions or in supervising their day-to-day activities. Plaintiffs offer no evidence to the contrary.

To be sure, the Franchise Agreement requires Franchisee to abide by a particular method of operating and maintaining a restaurant, called the "McDonald's System." This system details

> the retailing of a limited menu of uniform and quality food products, emphasizing prompt and courteous service in a clean, wholesome atmosphere which is intended to be attractive to children and families and includes proprietary rights in certain valuable trade names, service marks, and trademarks, including the trade names "McDonald's" and "McDonald's Hamburgers," designs and color schemes for restaurant buildings, signs, equipment layouts, formulas and specifications for certain food products, methods of inventory and operation control, bookkeeping and accounting, and manuals covering business practices and policies.

But that system does not set the terms of the relationships between Franchisee and its employees. It is instead a set of prescriptions for branding, operations, and quality control that is common for franchise relationships.

Plaintiffs point to the requirement that Franchisee operate the restaurant in a "good, clean, wholesome manner", but Plaintiffs do not point to any evidence that any party to the Franchise Agreement construed this requirement to mean an absence of sexual discrimination and harassment among Franchisee's employees. And even if that is what this requirement means, there is no evidence that it gave McDonald's the ability to do anything other than find Franchisee in breach of the Franchisee Agreement and terminate that agreement. Although such a termination would have impeded Franchisee's ability to continue operating, control over Franchisee's ability to continue business does not amount to control over Franchisee's relationship with its individual employees.

Plaintiffs also rely on the fact that McDonald's periodically assessed Franchisee according to its "National Franchising Standards" ("NFS"). McDonald's used these assessments to "identify those [franchisees] with whom McDonald's desires to grow and/or enter into new franchise relationships." (Bonta Dep. 28.) Before the term of a franchise agreement expires, McDonald's will review the assessments to determine whether to award a new term to the franchisee. But these standards were not part of the Franchise Agreement; indeed, the standards themselves expressly state that they "do not create or modify any contract rights or obligations" and "do not necessarily address whether" the franchisee is complying with its franchise agreement. McDonald's plays a "consulting role" with respect to its franchisee's compliance with the standards; it cannot require the franchisee to comply with them. 

Plaintiffs argue that the NFS gave McDonald's substantial control because McDonald's frequently assessed Franchisee's compliance with the NFS and then used those assessments to determine whether to renew a franchise at the end of its term. But gathering data every few weeks or months from each restaurant for the purpose of deciding whether to continue a business relationship with Franchisee at the end of a multi-year term is a far cry from exercising day-to-day supervision and control over Franchisee's employees. Plaintiffs do not point to any instance in which McDonald's used its assessments to dictate the discipline, promotion, or any other change in the terms or conditions of employment for any particular employee of Franchisee. Although several Franchisee employees testified that scores on these assessments were considered _by Franchisee_ during employee performance reviews (Blakesley Dep. 141-42, ECF No. 210-43), or were used _by Franchisee_ as the basis for awarding employee perks or bonuses (Pyers Dep. 201, ECF No. 210-41; Bitner Dep. 205-08, ECF No. 210-40), there is no evidence that McDonald's required Franchisee to use the assessments in this manner. The fact that Franchisee took these assessments into account when exercising _its own control_ does not mean that McDonald's codetermined the essential conditions of Plaintiffs' employment. Thus, Plaintiffs have not shown that the NFS standards gave McDonald's any significant control over Franchisee's employees.

McDonald's also provided an operations and training manual to its franchisees. Among other things, that manual contains a list of duties and procedures for opening the restaurant and starting a shift. The Franchise Agreement provides that Franchisee must "promptly adopt and use exclusively the formulas, methods, and policies contained in the business manuals." However, the manual itself states that franchisees can "choose to apply or implement any portion" of it, and that franchisees are "exclusively responsible for complying with all statutes, laws, and regulations applicable to their restaurants." A more recent version of the manual does not contain these disclaimers, but it repeatedly instructs employees to "contact your Owner/Operator for advice" about "practices at your restaurant." Thus, the manual makes clear that practices will vary according to choices made by the franchisee. Importantly, nothing in the manual excerpts provided by the parties gave McDonald's the ability to control the Franchisee's relationship with its employees.

Plaintiffs also point to a variety of templates and resources that McDonald's provided to Franchisee, including: an "Employee Resources" poster describing employee rights and a sexual harassment policy; a personality test for screening candidates; a website for job postings; job interview guidelines and application templates; software to track employee time and generate disciplinary reports; guidelines for the number and type of employees necessary to run a restaurant; and training programs for certain employees. However, there is no evidence that any of these resources or programs gave McDonald's control over the essential terms of employment for Franchisee's employees. To the contrary, the evidence shows that Franchisee alone possessed and exercised that control.

Plaintiffs put stock in the fact that McDonald's purportedly required Franchisee to display the Employee Resources poster. Plaintiffs apparently argue that McDonald's effectively required Franchisee to adopt the McDonald's policy described on the poster for reporting sexual harassment. However, displaying a policy is one thing. Implementing it is another. There is no evidence that McDonald's played any role in implementing or enforcing such a policy. Indeed, the poster states that any harassment is to be reported to employees of Franchisee (e.g., the "Restaurant/General Manager" or the "Owner Operator"). The poster also contains a blank space for contact information for the manager or owner of the restaurant. The poster provides no information or guidance about reporting misconduct to McDonald's. Thus, the poster does not create a genuine issue of fact about whether McDonald's retained sufficient control over Franchisee's employees to qualify as a joint employer.

Finally, Plaintiffs rely on an April 14, 2021, press release by McDonald's announcing that, "[b]eginning in January 2022," it would be applying "new Global Brand Standards" to all of its restaurants; these new standards will apparently "prioritize actions" in "harassment, discrimination and retaliation prevention[.]" According to the press release, McDonald's intends to assess its restaurants and "hold [them] accountable in accordance with applicable McDonald's market's business evaluation processes." 

McDonald's rightly notes that the press release has limited relevance to this case because it is forward-looking. It does not apply to the time period at issue in the complaint. Plaintiffs respond that the press release is evidence that McDonald's has always had the right to impose personnel policies on its franchisees. But neither the details of the new policy, nor its mechanism of enforcement are laid out in the press release. Nothing in the press release itself indicates that McDonald's has had, or will have, control over the conduct of an individual employee of a franchisee. Indeed, the references to McDonald's "brand standards" and "business evaluation processes" suggest that McDonald's will implement its new policies in the same manner that it implements the NFS. As discussed above, periodic assessments and the power to terminate the franchise relationship are not equivalent to day-to-day supervision and control over the working conditions of a franchisee's employees.

In short, construing the evidence in a light most favorable to Plaintiffs, there is no genuine dispute that McDonald's did not meaningfully participate in employment decisions or possess sufficient control over the terms of Plaintiffs' employment to qualify as a joint employer. The control that McDonald's did have in its relationship with Franchisee was "control over conformity to standard operational details inherent in many franchise settings" and "the power to terminate [the] franchises." As other courts have concluded, that level of involvement in a franchisee's business does not suffice to give rise to employer liability under Title VII. 

Plaintiffs rely on cases in which courts denied a franchisor's attempt to dismiss similar claims against it because the franchisor was involved in creating personnel policies or provided training to the franchisee's employees. Those cases are distinguishable. There, courts concluded that the plaintiffs had alleged sufficient facts in their complaints to state a plausible claim against the franchisor and proceed to discovery. The question facing this Court is a different one. The Court is not assessing the allegations in Plaintiffs' complaint. At this stage, Plaintiffs must support their allegations with evidence sufficient to demonstrate that they can proceed to trial against McDonald's. They have not done so. They have not shown that there is a genuine dispute of fact about whether McDonald's was a joint employer with Franchisee.

[ *** ]

##### III. CONCLUSION

For the reasons stated, McDonald's is entitled to summary judgment for the Title VII and ELCRA claims, so the Court will grant its motion.