### Brunner v. Al Attar 

#### 786 S.W.2d 784 (Tex. App. 1990)

##### SAM BASS, Justice.

Farouk Al Attar and Rima Al Attar are husband and wife, and partners in a general partnership, known as Apollo Paint & Body. Brunner states that Farouk's actions are the basis of this suit, and that Rima and Apollo are vicariously liable. Brunner alleged that Farouk terminated her, because he feared that she would catch and spread the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) to employees. Appellees urged that Brunner was terminated because of her refusal to work during the hours required, her request to be terminated, and her failure, inability and/or refusal to perform the work expected of her.

Brunner stated that she had neither contracted AIDS, nor been infected with the human immunodeficiency virus which causes AIDS.

Appellees moved for summary judgment, alleging that Brunner did not state a cause of action, and could not amend her pleadings to state a cause of action.

Brunner testified by deposition that she was terminated from Apollo Paint & Body because she was a volunteer with the AIDS Foundation. Brunner had told Farouk that she would be volunteering in her free time on Saturdays and Sundays, and in the evenings. Brunner promised that her volunteer work would not interfere with her position at Apollo, and stated that there was no danger to the employees at Apollo Paint & Body, because Brunner could not catch AIDS from the patients' touching, sneezing, or breathing on her. She further stated that the only way to catch AIDS is through sexual contact or blood transfusions. Brunner told Farouk that his customers did not have to know about her volunteer work. Farouk responded by saying that he could not allow Brunner to perform volunteer work at the AIDS Foundation and work at Apollo. Farouk told Brunner that he did not want to place himself, his family, and the office workers in jeopardy. Farouk urged Brunner to resign, and she refused.

Rima told another supervisor not to let Farouk fire Brunner. In a later discussion, Farouk asked Brunner to reconsider, but she would not. Farouk then said that he would have to fire Brunner.

Brunner asserts that this Court should not permit her to be terminated for performing volunteer work for the AIDS Foundation because her termination violates the public policy exception to the employment-at-will doctrine.

Brunner does not allege that her employment was governed by a contract, or that it was for a definite term. The general rule is that employment for an indefinite term may be terminated at will and without cause. In _Sabine Pilot,_ the Texas Supreme Court recognized a very narrow exception to the judicially-created employment-at-will doctrine. "That narrow exception covers only the discharge of an employee for the sole reason that the employee refused to perform an illegal act." The supreme court stated that where an employee sought to invoke the public policy exception, "it is the plaintiff's burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his discharge was for no reason other than his refusal to perform an illegal act."In [_McClendon v. Ingersoll-Rand Co.,_ the [Texas] supreme court announced another judicially-created exception to the employment-at-will doctrine, which permits recovery of lost future wages, mental anguish, and punitive damages, where the "plaintiff proves that the principal reason for his termination was the employer's desire to avoid contributing to or paying benefits under the employee's pension fund."

Brunner alleges that she was fired because she refused to quit her volunteer work with the AIDS Foundation; however, she has not alleged that she was terminated for refusing to perform an illegal act, or because her employer wished to avoid paying benefits under her pension fund. Brunner has failed to allege sufficient facts to place her within these two exceptions to the employment-at-will doctrine. _See_ _Jennings v. Minco Technology Labs, Inc.,_ 765 S.W.2d 497 (Tex. App. 1989) (court refused to create an exception to the doctrine on the grounds of public policy, to enable an employee to obtain declaratory and injunctive relief, restraining employer from administering random urinalysis drug tests on employees); _Berry v. Doctor's Health Facilities,_ 715 S.W.2d 60 (Tex. App. 1986) (court declined to create an exception to the employment-at-will doctrine on the grounds of public policy, to encompass a cause of action asserting wrongful termination, because the employee "knew too much" about alleged improprieties within the hospital administration); _Winters v. Houston Chronicle Publishing Company,_ 781 S.W.2d 408 (Tex. App. 1989) (court declined to extend _Sabine Pilot_ exception to employment-at-will doctrine, where private employee alleged he was discharged for reporting to management that his upper level managers and supervisors were engaged in circulation fraud, inventory theft, and a "kickback" scheme). This Court cannot create another exception for performing volunteer work at the Houston AIDS Foundation. If such an exception is to be created, that is a matter within the province of the Texas Supreme Court.

